CHAPTER 1
Gene manipulation in the post-genomics era

Introduction
Since the beginning of the last century, scientists
have been interested in genes. First, they wanted to
find out what genes were made of, how they worked,
and how they were transmitted from generation to
generation with the seemingly mythic ability to control both heredity and variation. Genes were initially
thought of in functional terms as hereditary units
responsible for the appearance of particular biological characteristics, such as eye or hair color in
human beings, but their physical properties were
unclear. It was not until the 1940s that genes were
shown to be made of DNA, and that a workable
physical and functional definition of the gene – a
length of DNA encoding a particular protein – was
achieved (Box 1.1). Next, scientists wanted to find
ways to study the structure, behavior, and activity of
genes in more detail. This required the simultaneous
development of novel techniques for DNA analysis
and manipulation. These developments began in
the early 1970s with the first experiments involving
the creation and manipulation of recombinant DNA.
Thus began the recombinant DNA revolution.

Gene manipulation involves the creation
and cloning of recombinant DNA
The definition of recombinant DNA is any artificially
created DNA molecule which brings together DNA
sequences that are not usually found together in
nature. Gene manipulation refers to any of a variety of
sophisticated techniques for the creation of recombinant DNA and, in many cases, its subsequent introduction into living cells. In the developed world there
is a precise legal definition of gene manipulation as a
result of government legislation to control it. In the
UK, for example, gene manipulation is defined as:
“. . . the formation of new combinations of heritable
material by the insertion of nucleic acid molecules,

produced by whatever means outside the cell, into
any virus, bacterial plasmid or other vector system
so as to allow their incorporation into a host organism in which they do not naturally occur but in
which they are capable of continued propagation.”
The propagation of recombinant DNA inside a particular host cell so that many copies of the same
sequence are produced is known as cloning.
Cloning was a significant breakthrough in molecular biology because it became possible to obtain homogeneous preparations of any desired DNA molecule
in amounts suitable for laboratory-scale experiments.
A single organism, the bacterium Escherichia coli,
played the dominant role in the early years of the
recombinant DNA era. This bacterium had always
been a popular model system for molecular geneticists and, prior to the development of recombinant
DNA technology, there were already a large number
of well-characterized mutants, gene regulation was
understood, and many plasmids had been isolated. It
is not surprising that the first cloning experiments
were undertaken in E. coli and that this organism
became the primary cloning host. Subsequently,
cloning techniques were extended to a range of
other microorganisms, such as Bacillus subtilis,
Pseudomonas spp., yeasts, and filamentous fungi, and
then to higher eukaryotes. Despite these advances,
E. coli remains the most widely used cloning host
even today because gene manipulation in this
bacterium is technically easier than in any other
organism. As a result, it is unusual for researchers to
clone DNA directly in other organisms. Rather, DNA
from the organism of choice is first manipulated in E.
coli and subsequently transferred back to the original
host or another organism, as appropriate. Without
the ability to clone and manipulate DNA in E. coli,
the application of recombinant DNA technology to
other organisms would be greatly hindered.
Until the mid-1980s, all cloning was cell-based
(i.e. the DNA molecule of interest had to be introduced into E. coli or another host for amplification).

2

CHAPTER 1

Box 1.1 What is a gene?
The concept of the gene as a unit of
hereditary information was introduced by
the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel in an
1866 paper entitled ‘Experiments in plant
hybridization’. In this paper, he detailed the
results of numerous crosses between pea
plants of different characteristics, and from
these data put forward a number of postulates
concerning the principles of heredity.
Although Mendel introduced the concept, the
word gene was not used until 25 years after his
death. It was coined by Wilhelm Johansen in
1909 to describe a heritable factor responsible
for the transmission and expression of a given
biological trait. In Mendel’s work, published
over 40 years earlier, these hereditary factors
were given the rather less catchy name
Formbildungelementen (form-building elements).
Mendel had no clear idea what his
hereditary elements consisted of in a
physical sense, and described them as purely
mathematical entities. The first evidence as
to the physical and functional nature of
genes emerged in 1902. In this year, the
chromosome theory of inheritance was put
forward by William Sutton, after he noticed
that chromosomes during meiosis behaved
in the same way as Mendel’s elements. Also
in 1902, Archibald Garrod showed that the
metabolic disorder alkaptonurea resulted from
the failure of a specific enzyme and could be
transmitted in an autosomal recessive fashion.
This he called an inborn error of metabolism.
This was the first evidence that genes were
necessary to make proteins. In 1911, Thomas

In 1983, there was a further mini-revolution in
molecular biology with the invention of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). This technique allowed
DNA sequences to be amplified in vitro using pure
enzymes. The great sensitivity and robustness of the
PCR allows DNA to be prepared rapidly from very
small amounts of starting material and material of
very poor quality, but it is not as accurate as cellbased cloning and only works on relatively short
DNA sequences. Therefore cell-based cloning and
the PCR have complementary but overlapping uses
in gene manipulation.
Although the initial cloning experiments gener-

Hunt Morgan and colleagues performed the
first genetic linkage experiments in the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster, and hence showed
that genes were located on chromosomes
and were physically linked together.
A more precise idea of the physical and
functional basis for the gene emerged during
the Second World War. In 1942, George
Beadle and Edward Tatum found that X-rayinduced mutations in fungi often caused
specific biochemical defects, reflecting the
absence or malfunction of a single enzyme.
This led to the one gene one enzyme model
of gene function. In 1944, Oswald Avery and
colleagues showed that DNA was the genetic
material. Thus evolved a simple picture of the
gene – a length of DNA in a chromosome
which encoded the information required to
produce a single enzyme.
This definition had to be expanded in the
following years to encompass new discoveries.
For example, not all genes encode enzymes:
many encode proteins with other functions,
and some do not encode proteins at all, but
produce functional RNA molecules. Further
complexity results from the selective use of
information in the gene to generate multiple
products. In eukaryotes, this often reflects
alternative splicing, but in both prokaryotes
and eukaryotes multiple gene products can
be generated by alternative promoter or
polyadenylation site usage. In more obscure
cases, two or more genes may be required to
generate a single polypeptide, e.g. the rare
phenomenon of trans-splicing.

ated a great deal of excitement, it is unlikely that any
of the early workers in this field could have predicted
the immense impact recombinant DNA technology
would have on the progress of scientific understanding and indeed on society as a whole, particularly
in the fields of medicine and agriculture. Today, gene
manipulation underlies a multi-billion dollar industry,
employing hundreds of thousands of people worldwide and offering solutions to some of mankind’s most
intractable problems. The ability to insert new combinations of genetic material into microbes, animals,
and plants offers novel ways to produce valuable
small molecules and proteins; provides the means

3

Gene manipulation in the post-genomics era

Profiling

Genetic
disease

Cloned P450s

Infectious
disease
Animal models
or human disease

Pharamacogenomics

Diagnostic
nucleic
acids
Gene therapy

Plants
Therapeutic
small molecules

Therapeutic
nucleic
acids

MEDICINE

Gene repair
Antisense drugs

Microbes

Diagnostic
proteins

DNA
Vaccines
Therapeutic
proteins

Vaccines

Microbes
Microbes

Fig. 1.1

Animals

Plants

The impact of gene manipulation on the practice of medicine.

to produce plants and animals that are diseaseresistant, tolerant of harsh environments, and have
higher yields of useful products; and provides new
methods to treat and prevent human disease.
Recombinant DNA has opened new horizons
in medicine
The developments in gene manipulation that have
taken place in the last 30 years have revolutionized
medicine by increasing our understanding of the basis
of disease, providing new tools for disease diagnosis,
and opening the way to the discovery or development
of new drugs, treatments, and vaccines.
The first medical benefit to arise from recombinant
DNA technology was the availability of significant
quantities of therapeutic proteins, such as human
growth hormone (HGH), which is used to treat
growth defects. Originally HGH was purified from
pituitary glands removed from cadavers. However,
many pituitary glands are required to produce
enough HGH to treat just one child. Furthermore,
some children treated with pituitary-derived HGH
have developed Creutzfeld–Jakob syndrome originating from cadavers. Following the cloning and
expression of the HGH gene in E. coli, it became possible to produce enough HGH in a 10-liter fermenter
to treat hundreds of children. Since then, many different therapeutic proteins have become available for
the first time. Many of these proteins are also manufactured in E. coli but others are made in yeast or
animal cells and some in plants or the milk of genetically modified animals. The only common factor is

that the relevant gene has been cloned and overexpressed using the techniques of gene manipulation.
Medicine has benefited from recombinant DNA
technology in other ways (Fig. 1.1). For example,
novel routes to vaccines have been developed: the
current hepatitis B vaccine is produced by the expression of a viral antigen on the surface of yeast cells, and
a recombinant vaccine has been used to eliminate
rabies from foxes in a large part of Europe. Gene manipulation can also be used to increase the levels of
small molecules within microbial or plant cells. This
can be done by cloning all the genes for a particular biosynthetic pathway and overexpressing them.
Alternatively, it is possible to shut down particular
metabolic pathways and thus redirect intermediates
towards the desired end product. This approach has
been used to facilitate production of chiral intermediates, antibiotics, and novel therapeutic entities. New
antibiotics can also be created by mixing and matching genes from organisms producing different but
related molecules in a technique known as combinatorial biosynthesis.
Gene cloning enables nucleic acid probes to be
produced readily, and such probes have many uses
in medicine. For example, they can be used to determine or confirm the identity of a microbial pathogen
or to carry out pre- or peri-natal diagnosis of an
inherited genetic disease. Increasingly, probes are
being used to determine the likelihood of adverse
reactions to drugs or to select the best class of drug
to treat a particular illness in different groups of patients. Nucleic acids are also being used as therapeutic
entities in their own right. For example, antisense

4

CHAPTER 1

nucleic acids are being used to downregulate gene
expression in certain diseases, and the relatively new
phenomenon of RNA interference is poised to become
a breakthrough technology for the development of
new therapeutic approaches. In other cases, nucleic
acids are being administered to correct or repair
inherited gene defects (gene therapy, gene repair) or
as vaccines. In the reverse of gene repair, animals are
being generated that have mutations identical to
those found in human disease. These are being used
as models to learn more about disease pathology and
to test novel therapies.
Mapping and sequencing technologies
formed a crucial link between gene
manipulation and genomics
As well as techniques for DNA cloning and transfer
to new host cells, the recombinant DNA revolution
spawned new technologies for gene mapping (ordering genes on chromosomes) and DNA sequencing
(determining the order of bases, identified by the
letters A, C, G, and T, along the DNA molecule).
Within the gene itself, the order of bases determines
the protein encoded by the gene by specifying the
order of amino acids. Thus, DNA sequencing made it
possible to work out the amino acid sequence of the
encoded protein without the direct analysis of the
protein itself. This was extremely useful because, at
the time DNA sequencing was first developed, only
the most abundant proteins in the cell could be

purified in sufficient quantities to facilitate direct
analysis. Further elements surrounding the coding
region of the gene were identified as control regions,
specifying each gene’s expression profile. As more
sequence data accumulated, it became possible to
identify common features in related genes, both in
the coding region and the regulatory regions. This
type of sequence analysis was greatly facilitated by
the foundation of sequence databases, and the development of computer-aided techniques for sequence
analysis and comparison, a field now known as bioinformatics. Today, DNA molecules can be scanned
quickly for a whole series of structural features,
e.g. restriction enzyme recognition sites, matches
or overlaps with other sequences, start and stop signals for transcription and translation, and sequence
repeats, using programs available on the Internet.
The original goal of sequencing was to determine
the precise order of nucleotides in a gene, but soon
the goal became the sequence of a small genome. A
genome is the complete content of genetic information
in an organism, i.e. all the genes and other sequences
it contains. The first target was the genome of a
small virus called φX174, then larger plasmid and
viral genomes, then chromosomes and microbial
genomes until ultimately the complete genomes of
higher eukaryotes were sequenced (Table 1.1). In
the mid-1980s, scientists began to discuss seriously
how the entire human genome might be sequenced.
To put these discussions in context, the largest
stretch of DNA that can be sequenced in a single pass

Table 1.1 Timeline of genome sequencing, showing the increasing genome sizes that have been achieved.

Genome sequenced
Bacteriophage fX174
Plasmid pBR322
Bacteriophage l
Epstein–Barr virus
Yeast chromosome III
Hemophilus influenzae
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Ceanorhabditis elegans
Drosophila melanogaster
Arabidopsis thaliana
Homo sapiens
Rice (Oryza sativa)
Pufferfish (Fugu rubripes)
Mouse (Mus musculis)
Chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes)

Year

Genome size

Comment

1977
1979
1982
1984
1992
1995
1996
1998
2000
2000
2001
2002
2002
2002/3

5.38 kb
4.3 kb
48.5 kb
172 kb
315 kb
1.8 Mb
12 Mb
97 Mb
165 Mb
125 Mb
3000 Mb
430 Mb
400 Mb
2700 Mb

First genome sequenced
First plasmid sequenced

2005

3000 Mb

Closest to human genome

First chromosome sequenced
First genome of cellular organism to be sequenced
First eukaryotic genome to be sequenced
First genome of multicellular organism to be sequenced
First plant genome to be sequenced
First mammalian genome to be sequenced
First crop plant to be sequenced
Smallest known vertebrate genome
Widely used model organism

5

Gene manipulation in the post-genomics era

(even today) is 600–800 nucleotides and the largest
genome that had been sequenced in 1985 was that
of the 172-kb Epstein–Barr virus (Baer et al. 1984).
By comparison, the human genome is 3000 Mb in
size, over 17,000 times bigger! One school of thought
was that a completely new sequencing methodology
would be required, and a number of different technologies were explored but with little success. Early
on, however, it was realized that existing sequencing
technology could be used if a large genome could
be broken down into more manageable pieces for
sequencing in a highly parallel fashion, and then the
pieces could be joined together again. A strategy was
agreed upon in which a map of the human genome
would be used as a scaffold to assemble the sequence.
The problem here was that in 1985 there were
not enough markers, or points of reference, on the
human genome map to produce a physical scaffold
on which to assemble the complete sequence. Genetic
maps are based on recombination frequencies, and
in model organisms they are constructed by carrying
out large-scale crosses between different mutant
strains. The principle of a genetic map is that the
further apart two loci are on a chromosome, the
more likely that a crossover will occur between them
during meiosis. Recombination events resulting from
crossovers can be scored in genetically amenable
organisms such as the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
and yeast by looking for new combinations of the
mutant phenotypes in the offspring of the cross.
This approach cannot be used in human populations because it would involve setting up large-scale
matings between people with different inherited
diseases. Instead, human genetic maps rely on the
analysis of DNA sequence polymorphisms, i.e. naturally occurring DNA sequence differences in the
population which do not have an overt, debilitating
effect. A major breakthrough was the development
of methods for using DNA probes to identify polymorphic sequences (Botstein et al. 1980).
Prior to the Human Genome Project (HGP), lowresolution genetic maps had been constructed using
restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs).
These are naturally occurring variations that create
or destroy sites for restriction enzymes and therefore generate different sized bands on Southern blots
(Fig. 1.2). The Southern blot is a technique for
separating DNA fragments by size, see Fig. 2.6, p. 23.
The problem with RFLPs was that they were too
few and too widely spaced to be of much use for
constructing a framework for physical mapping –
the first RFLP map had just over 400 markers and a
resolution of 10 cM, equivalent to one marker for

Probes
a

b
I

1

2

2

3

II
1
I.1

I.2

II.1

II.2

4
II.3

II.4

Fig. 1.2 Restriction fragment length polymorphisms
(RFLPs) are sequence variants that create or destroy a
restriction site in DNA therefore altering the length of the
restriction fragment that is detected. The top panel shows two
alternative alleles, in which the restriction fragment detected
by a specific probe differs in length due to the presence or
absence of the middle of three restriction sites (represented by
vertical arrows). Alleles a and b therefore produce hybridizing
bands of different sizes in Southern blots (lower panel). This
allows the alleles to be traced through a family pedigree. For
example child II.2 has inherited two copies of allele a, one
from each parent, while child II.4 has inherited one copy of
allele a and one copy of allele b.

every 10 Mb of DNA (Donis-Keller et al. 1987). The
necessary breakthrough came with the discovery of
new polymorphic markers, known as microsatellites,
which were abundant and widely dispersed in the
genome (Fig. 1.3). By 1992, a genetic map based on
microsatellites had been constructed with a resolution of 1 cM (equivalent to one marker for every 1
Mb of DNA) which was a suitable template for physical mapping.
Unlike genetic maps, physical maps are based on
real units of DNA and therefore provide a basis for
sequence assembly. The physical mapping phase
of the HGP involved the creation of genomic DNA
libraries and the identification and assembly of
overlapping clones to form contigs (unbroken series
of clones representing contiguous segments of the
genome). When the HGP was initiated, the highestcapacity vectors available for cloning were cosmids,
with a maximum insert size of 40 kb. Because hundreds of thousands of cosmid clones would have to be
screened to assemble a physical map, the HGP would
not have progressed very quickly without the development of novel high-capacity vectors and methods
to find overlaps between them so that clone contigs
could be assembled on the genomic scaffold.

6

CHAPTER 1

•
a

b
Probes
c

d

I

1

2

2

3

II
1
I.1

I.2

II.1

II.2

II.3

4
II.4

Fig. 1.3 Microsatellites are sequence variants that cause
restriction fragments or PCR products to differ in length due
to the number of copies of a short tandem repeat sequence,
1–12 nt in length. The top panel shows four alternative
alleles, in which the restriction fragment detected by a specific
probe differs in length due to a variable number of tandem
repeats. All four alleles produce bands of different sizes on
Southern blots (lower panel) or different sized PCR products
(not shown). Unlike RFLPs, multiple allelism is common for
microsatellites so the precise inheritance pattern in a family
pedigree can be tracked. For example, the mother and father
in the pedigree have alleles b/d and a/c, respectively (the
smaller DNA fragments move further during electrophoresis).
The first child, II.1, has inherited allele b from his mother and
allele a from his father.

The genomics era began in earnest in
1995 with the complete sequencing of
a bacterial genome
The late 1980s and early 1990s saw much debate
about the desirability of sequencing the human
genome. This debate often strayed from rational
scientific debate into the realms of politics, personalities, and egos. Among the genuine issues raised were
questions such as:
•
•
•
•

Is the sequencing of the human genome an intellectually appropriate project for biologists?
Is sequencing the human genome feasible?
What benefits might arise from the project?
Will these benefits justify the cost and are there
alternative ways of achieving the same benefits?

Will the project compete with other areas of biology for funding and intellectual resources?

Behind the debate was a fear that sequencing the
human genome was an end in itself, much like a
mountaineer who climbs a new peak just because
it is there.
The publicly funded Human Genome Project
was officially launched in 1990, and the scientific
community began to develop new strategies to enable
the large-scale mapping and sequencing that were
required to complete the project, strategies which
centered around high-throughput, highly parallel
automated sequencing. One of the benefits of this
new technology development was the completion
of several pilot genome projects, beginning with that
of the bacterium Hemophilus influenzae (Fleischmann
et al. 1995). The net effect was that by the time the
human genome had been sequenced (International
Human Genome Sequencing Consortium 2001,
Venter et al. 2001), the complete sequence was
already known for over 30 bacterial genomes plus
that of a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), the fruit
fly, a nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans), and a plant
(Arabidopsis thaliana).
Parallel developments in the field of bioinformatics
were required to handle and analyze the exponentially increasing amounts of sequence data arising
from the genome projects, but bioinformatics also
facilitated the development of new sequencing strategies. For example, when a European consortium set
itself the goal of sequencing the entire genome of the
budding yeast S. cerevisiae (15 Mb), they segmented
the task by allocating the sequencing of each chromosome to different groups. That is, they subdivided
the genome into more manageable parts. At the time
this project was initiated there was no other way
of achieving the objective and when the resulting
genomic sequence was published (Goffeau et al.
1996), it was the result of a unique multi-institution
collaboration. While the S. cerevisiae sequencing
project was underway, a new genomic sequencing
strategy was unveiled: shotgun sequencing. In this
approach, large numbers of genomic fragments are
sequenced and sophisticated bioinformatics algorithms used to construct the finished sequence. In
contrast to the consortium approach used with S.
cerevisiae, a single laboratory set up as a sequencing
factory undertook shotgun sequencing.
The first success with shotgun sequencing was
the complete sequence of the bacterium H. influenzae (Fleischmann et al. 1995) and this was
quickly followed with the sequences of Mycoplasma

Gene manipulation in the post-genomics era

genitalium (Fraser et al. 1995), Mycoplasma pneumoniae
(Himmelreich et al. 1996) and Methanococcus jannaschii
(Bult et al. 1996). It should be noted that H. influenzae
was selected for sequencing because so little was
known about it: there was no genetic map and not
much biochemical data either. By contrast, S. cerevisiae was a well-mapped and well-characterized
organism. As will be seen in Chapter 17, the relative
merits of shotgun sequencing vs. ordered, map-based
sequencing are still being debated today. Nevertheless, the fact that a major sequencing laboratory can
turn out the entire sequence of a bacterium in 1–2
months shows the power of shotgun sequencing.
Genome sequencing greatly increases our
understanding of basic biology
Fears that sequencing the human genome would be
an end in itself have proved groundless. Because so
many different genomes have been sequenced it is
now possible to undertake comparative analyses of
genomes, a topic known as comparative genomics. By
comparing genomes from distantly related species
we can begin to decipher the major stages in evolution. By comparing more closely related species we
can begin to uncover more recent events such as
genome rearrangement which have facilitated speciation (see e.g. Murphy et al. 2004). Currently, the
most fertile area of comparative genomics is the analysis of bacterial genomes because so many have been
sequenced. Already this analysis is throwing up some
interesting questions. For example, over 25% of the
genes in any one bacterial genome have no equivalents in any other sequenced genome. Is this an artifact resulting from limited sequence data or does it
reflect the unique evolutionary events that have
shaped the genomes of these organisms? Similarly,
comparative analysis of the genomes of a wide range
of thermophiles has revealed numerous interesting
features, including strong evidence of extensive horizontal gene transfer. However, what is the genomic
basis for thermophily? We still do not know.
One of the fascinating aspects of the classic paper
by Fleischmann et al. (1995) was their analysis of
the metabolic capabilities of H. influenzae, which
they deduced from sequence information alone. This
analysis has been extended to every other sequenced
genome and is providing tremendous insight into
the physiology and ecological adaptability of different organisms. For example, obligate parasitism in
bacteria is linked to the absence of genes for certain
enzymes involved in central metabolic pathways.
Another example is the correlation between genome

7

size and the diversity of ecological niches that can
be colonized. The larger the bacterial genome, the
greater are the metabolic capabilities of the host
organism and this means that the organism can be
found in a greater number of habitats.
Another benefit of genome mapping and sequencing that deserves mention is the proliferation of international scientific collaborations. In magnitude, the
goal of sequencing the human genome was equivalent to putting a man on the moon. However, putting
a man on the moon was a race between two nations
and was driven by global political ambitions as
much as by scientific challenge. By contrast, genome
sequencing truly has been an international effort
requiring laboratories in Europe, North America,
and Japan to collaborate in a way never seen before.
The extent of this collaboration can be seen by looking at the affiliations of the authors on many of the
classic genome papers (e.g. The Arabidopsis Genome
Initiative 2000, International Human Genome
Sequencing Consortium 2001). The fact that one US
company, Celera Genomics Inc., has successfully
undertaken many sequencing projects in no way
diminishes this collaborative effort. Rather, they have
constantly challenged the accepted way of doing
things and have increased the efficiency with which
key tasks have been undertaken.
Three other aspects of genome sequencing and
genomics deserve mention. First, in other branches
of science such as nuclear physics and space exploration, the concept of “superfacilities” is well established.
With the advent of whole genome sequencing, biology is moving into the superfacility league and a
number of sequencing “factories” have been established. Secondly, high throughput methodologies
have become commonplace and this has meant a
partnering of biology with automation, instrumentation, and data management. Thirdly, many biologists
have eschewed chemistry, physics, and mathematics
but progress in genomics demands that biologists
have a much greater understanding of these subjects.
For example, methodologies such as mass spectrometry, X-ray crystallography, and protein structure
modeling are now fundamental to the identification
of gene function. The impact that this has on undergraduate recruitment in the sciences remains to
be seen.
The post-genomics era aims at the complete
characterization of cells at all levels
Knowing the complete genome sequence of any
organism is very useful, but more important is

8

CHAPTER 1

finding the genes and determining their functions.
One of the most surprising results from the early
genome projects was the discovery of how little was
known about even the best-characterized organisms. In the case of the bakers’ yeast (S. cerevisiae),
which was considered a very well-characterized
model species, only one-third of the genes identified
in the sequencing project had been identified before.
Over 4000 genes were discovered with no known
function. Some of these could be assigned tentative
functions on the basis of similarity to known genes
either in the yeast or in other organisms, but this still
left over 2000 genes whose function could only be
established by direct experiments.
Following sequencing and annotation (gene finding) scientists then turned their attention to the
functional characterization of newly identified genes.
This has given rise to two new branches of biology, completely unheard of before 1995. These
are transcriptomics (the large-scale study of mRNA
expression) and proteomics (the large-scale study of
proteins). While mRNA can yield useful information
in terms of sequence, expression profile, and abundance, direct analysis of proteins is much more
informative, since proteins can be analyzed not only
in terms of sequence and abundance but also in
terms of structure, post-translational modification,
localization, and interactions with other molecules.
No-one working in the 1970s, when recombinant
DNA was a novel technology and protein analysis
was laborious, could have imagined today’s largescale experiments, where thousands of proteins
can be separated on a high-resolution gel, digested
into peptides, and identified rapidly by mass spectrometry. In the post-genomics era, it is becoming
possible to carry out complete characterizations of
cells, at the level of the genome, the transcriptome,
the proteome, and now even the metabolome (the
global profile of small-molecule metabolites in the
cell).
Recombinant DNA technology and genomics
form the foundation of the biotechnology
industry
The early successes in overproducing mammalian
proteins in E. coli suggested to a few entrepreneurial
individuals that a new company should be formed to
exploit the potential of recombinant DNA technology. Thus was Genentech Inc. born (Box 1.2). Since
then, thousands of biotechnology companies have
been formed worldwide. As soon as major new

developments in the science of gene manipulation
are reported, a rash of new companies is formed to
commercialize the new technology. For example,
many recently formed companies are hoping the
data from the Human Genome Project will result in
the identification of a large number of new proteins
with potential for human therapy. Other companies
have been founded to exploit novel technologies for
recombinant protein expression or the applications
of therapeutic nucleic acids.
Although there are thousands of biotechnology
companies, fewer than 100 have sales of their products and even fewer are profitable. Already many
biotechnology companies have failed, but the technology advances at such a rate that there is no
shortage of new company start-ups to take their
place. One group of biotechnology companies that
has prospered is those supplying specialist reagents
to laboratory workers engaged in gene manipulation, genomics, and proteomics. In the very beginning, researchers had to make their own restriction
enzymes and this limited the technology to those
with protein chemistry skills. Soon a number of companies were formed which catered to the needs of
researchers by supplying high-quality enzymes for
DNA manipulation. Despite the availability of these
enzymes, many people had great difficulty in cloning DNA. The reason for this was the need for
careful quality control of all the components used in
the preparation of reagents, something researchers
are not good at! The supply companies responded
by making easy-to-use cloning kits in addition to
enzymes. Today, these supply companies can provide almost everything that is needed to clone,
express, and analyze DNA and have thereby accelerated the use of recombinant DNA technology in all
biological disciplines. In the early days of recombinant DNA technology, the development of methodology was an end in itself for many academic
researchers. This is no longer true. The researchers
have gone back to using the tools to further our
knowledge of biology, and the development of
new methodologies has largely fallen to the supply
companies.

Outline of the rest of the book
The remainder of this book is divided into four parts.
Part I is devoted to the basic methodology for manipulating genes, and covers techniques for cloning and
gene manipulation in E. coli as well as in vitro methods

Gene manipulation in the post-genomics era

9

Box 1.2 The birth of an industry
Biotechnology is not new. Cheese, bread, and
yogurt are products of biotechnology and
have been known for centuries. However, the
stock-market excitement about biotechnology
stems from the potential of gene manipulation,
which is the subject of this book. The birth of
this modern version of biotechnology can be
traced to the founding of the company
Genentech.
In 1976, a 27-year-old venture capitalist
called Robert Swanson had a discussion over
a few beers with a University of California
professor, Herb Boyer. The discussion
centered on the commercial potential of gene

manipulation. Swanson’s enthusiasm for the
technology and his faith in it were contagious.
By the close of the meeting the decision
was taken to found Genentech (Genetic
Engineering Technology). Although Swanson
and Boyer faced skepticism from both the
academic and business communities they
forged ahead with their idea. Successes came
thick and fast (see Table B1.1) and within a
few years they had proved their detractors
wrong. Over 1000 biotechnology companies
have been set up in the USA alone since the
founding of Genentech but very, very few
have been as successful.

Table B1.1 Key events at Genentech.

1976

Genentech founded

1977
1978
1979
1980
1982

Genentech produced first human protein (somatostatin) in a microorganism
Human insulin cloned by Genentech scientists
Human growth hormone cloned by Genentech scientists
Genentech went public, raising $35 million
First recombinant DNA drug (human insulin) marketed (Genentech product licensed to Eli Lilly &
Co.)
First laboratory production of factor VIII for therapy of hemophilia. License granted to Cutter
Biological
Genentech launched its first product, Protropin (human growth hormone), for growth hormone
deficiency in children
Genentech launched Activase (tissue plasminogen activator) for dissolving blood clots in heart-attack
patients
Genentech launched Actimmune (interferon-g1b ) for treatment of chronic granulomatous disease
Genentech and the Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche complete a $2.1 billion merger

1984
1985
1987
1990
1990

such as the PCR (Fig. 1.4). Basic techniques for gene
and protein analysis are also described. Chapter 2
covers many of the techniques that are common to
all cloning experiments and are fundamental to the
success of the technology. Chapter 3 is devoted to
methods for selectively cutting DNA molecules into
fragments that can be readily joined together again.
Without the ability to do this, there would be no
recombinant DNA technology. If fragments of DNA
are inserted into cells, they fail to replicate except
in those rare cases where they integrate into the
chromosome. To enable such fragments to be propagated, they are inserted into DNA molecules
(vectors) that are capable of extrachromosomal
replication. These vectors are derived from plasmids

and bacteriophages and their basic properties are
described in Chapter 4.
Originally, the purpose of vectors was the propagation of cloned DNA but today vectors fulfil many
other roles, such as facilitating DNA sequencing,
promoting expression of cloned genes, facilitating
purification of cloned gene products, and reporting
the activity and localization of proteins. The specialist vectors for these tasks are described in Chapter 5.
With this background in place it is possible to
describe in detail how to clone the particular DNA
sequences that one wants. There are two basic
strategies. Either one clones all the DNA from an
organism and then selects the very small number of
clones of interest or one amplifies the DNA sequences

10

CHAPTER 1

The role of vectors
Agarose gel electrophoresis
Blotting (DNA, RNA, protein)
Nucleic acid hybridization
DNA transformation & electroporation
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)

Chapter 2

Restriction enzymes
Methods of joining DNA

Chapter 3

Basic properties of plasmids
Desirable properties of vectors
Plasmids as vectors
Bacteriophage λ vectors
Single-stranded DNA vectors
Vectors for cloning large DNA molecules
Specialist vectors
Over-producing proteins

Chapters 4 & 5

Chapter 6

Putting it all together:
Cloning in Practice

Cloning strategies
Cloning genomic DNA
cDNA cloning
Screening strategies
Expression cloning
Difference cloning
Basic DNA sequencing
Analyzing sequence data
Site-directed mutagenesis
Phage display

Chapters 7, 8 and 9

Analyzing & Changing
Cloned Genes

Basic
Techniques

Cutting &
Joining DNA

Vectors

of interest and then clones these. Both these strategies are described in Chapter 6, which focuses on
methods for cloning individual genes. Once the DNA
of interest has been cloned, it can be sequenced and
this will yield information on the proteins that are
encoded and any regulatory signals that are present
(Chapter 7). There might also be a wish to modify
the DNA and/or protein sequence and determine
the biological effects of such changes. The techniques
for sequencing and changing cloned genes and the
properties of the encoded protein are described in
Chapter 8. Finally, Chapter 9 provides an overview
of bioinformatics, the essential computer-based
methods for the analysis of genes and their products.
Part II of the book describes the specialist techniques for cloning in organisms other than E. coli
(Fig. 1.5). Each of these chapters can be read in
isolation from the other chapters in this section provided that there is a thorough understanding of the
material from the first part of the book. Chapter 10
details the methods for cloning in other bacteria.
Originally it was thought that some of these bacteria,
e.g. B. subtilis, would usurp the position of E. coli. This
has not happened and gene manipulation techniques
are used simply to better understand the biology of
these bacteria. Chapter 11 focuses on cloning in fungi,
although the emphasis is on the yeast S. cerevisiae.

Fig. 1.4 Roadmap
outlining the first
section of the book,
which covers basic
techniques in gene
manipulation and their
relationships.

Fungi are eukaryotes and are useful model systems
for investigating topics such as meiosis, mitosis,
and the control of cell division. Animal cells can be
cultured like microorganisms and the techniques
for introducing genes into them are described in
Chapter 12. Chapters 13 and 14 describe basic
procedures for the introduction of genes into animals
and plants, respectively, while Chapter 15 covers
some of the more cutting-edge techniques for these
same systems.
Part III of the book moves from gene manipulation
to genomics (Fig. 1.6). Chapter 16 introduces the
topic of genomics by providing a biological survey
of genomes. The genomes of free-living cellular
organisms range in size from less than 1 Mb for some
bacteria to millions, or tens of millions, of megabases
for some plants. The sheer size of the genome of even
a simple bacterium is such that to handle it in the
laboratory we need to break it down into smaller
pieces that are propagated as clones. As stated above,
one way to approach this problem is to create a
genome map, which can then be populated with
physical landmarks onto which the smaller DNA
fragments can be assembled. Another approach is
to dispense with the map and break the entire
genome into pieces, sequence them, and reassemble
them. The methods for mapping genomes and

Fig. 1.5 Roadmap
outlining the second
section of the book,
which covers advanced
techniques in gene
manipulation and
their application to
organisms other than
E. coli.

Genome

Cloning in
Bacteria
Other Than
E.coli

Getting DNA into bacteria
Cloning in Gram-negative bacteria
Cloning in Gram-positive bacteria

Chapter 10

Why clone in fungi
Vectors for use in fungi
Expression of cloned DNA
Two-hybrid system
Analysis of the whole genome

Chapter 11

Cloning in
Yeast &
Other
Fungi

Transformation of animal cells
Use of non-replicating DNA
Replication vectors
Viral transduction

Chapter 12

Gene
Transfer
To Animal
Cells

Transgenic mice
Other transgenic mammals
Transgenic birds, fish, Xenopus
Transgenic invertebrates

Chapter 13

Genetic
Manipulation
of Animals

Handling plant cells
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation
Direct DNA transfer
Plant viruses as vectors

Chapter 14

Genetic
Manipulation
of Plants

Inducible expression systems
Site-specific recombination
Gene inhibition
Insertional mutagenesis
Gene tagging
Entrapment constructs

Chapter 15

Advanced
Techniques
for Gene
Manipulation

Genome size
Sequence complexity
Introns and exons
Genome structure
Repetitive DNA

Chapter 16

Fragmentation with endonucleases
Separation of large DNA fragments
Isolation of chromosomes
Chromosome microdissection
Vectors for cloning

Chapter 17

Chromosome

Library

Map

Sequence

Fig. 1.6 Roadmap
covering the early
chapters of Part III,
which discuss different
methodologies for
mapping and
sequencing genomes.

Gene

Restriction fingerprinting
Chapter 17
STSs, ESTs, SSLPs and SNPs
RAPDs, CAPs and AFLPs
Hybridization mapping
Optical mapping, radiation hybrids and HAPPY mapping
Integration of mapping methods

Sequencing methodology
Automation and high throughput sequencing
Sequencing strategies
Sequencing large genomes
Pyrosequencing
Sequencing by hybridization

Chapters 7 and 17

Databases and software
Finding genes
Identifying gene function
Genome annotation
Molecular phylogenetics

Chapters 9 and 18

12

CHAPTER 1

assembling physical clone maps are discussed in
Chapter 17.
Sequencing a genome is not an end in itself.
Rather, it is just the first stage in a long journey
whose goal is a detailed understanding of all the
biological functions encoded in that genome and
their evolution. To achieve this goal it is necessary to
define all the genes in the genome and the functions
that they encode. There are a number of different
ways of doing this, one of which is comparative
genomics (Chapter 18). The premise here is that
DNA sequences encoding important cellular functions are likely to be conserved whereas dispensable
or non-coding sequences will not. However, comparative genomics only gives a broad overview of
the capabilities of different organisms. For a more
detailed view one needs to identify each gene in the
genome and determine its function. Over the last few
years, technology developments in this new discipline of functional genomics have been nothing short of
breathtaking. The final six chapters in this section
look at ways in which large-scale functional analysis
can be carried out (Fig. 1.7).
Chapter 19 explores the idea of determining gene
function by inactivation. Whereas this is carried
out on a gene-by-gene basis in classical genetics, in
genomics it is performed on a genome-wide scale.
Traditionally, this has involved the generation of
populations of random mutants or the deliberate and
systematic inactivation of every gene in the genome.
More recently, the technique of RNA interference
has risen to a dominant position, heralded by experiments in which up to 18,000 genes can be inactivated systematically to investigate their functions.
Chapter 20 moves onto the next stage, the analysis
of the transcriptome, focusing on sequence-based
techniques such as serial analysis of gene expression
(SAGE) and the use of DNA microarrays. Chapters
21–23 explore the burgeoning field of proteomics,
which involves the large-scale analysis of many dif-

Chapter 18
Comparative
genomics
Chapter 24
Metabolomics
and global
networks

Chapter 19
Genome-wide
mutagenesis and
interference
Chapter 9
Annotation and
bioinformatics
Chapters 20 & 21
Expression analysis –
transcriptome and
proteome

Chapter 23
Protein
interactions

Chapter 22
Protein structures

Fig. 1.7 Roadmap covering the later chapters of Part III,
which discuss the ‘omic’ disciplines for determining gene and
protein functions, scaling to the level of the complete cell or
organism.

ferent properties of proteins – expression, abundance,
physico-chemical properties, localization in the cell,
interaction with other molecules, structure, state of
modification – to create a robust definition of function. Finally, Chapter 24 explores the relatively new
field of metabolomics, the systematic analysis of all
small molecules (or metabolites) produced in the cell.
Part IV of the book provides some examples of
how the techniques of gene manipulation and genomics are being applied in healthcare, agriculture,
and industry. While some applications have been
mentioned in boxes throughout the book, the final
chapters concentrate on major applications, such
as pharmacogenomics, the analysis of quantitative
traits, biopharmaceutical production, gene therapy,
and modern agriculture, which really emphasize the
incredible potential of this technology.

Part I
Fundamental Techniques of Gene Manipulation

CHAPTER 2
Basic techniques

Introduction
The initial impetus for gene manipulation in vitro
came about in the early 1970s with the simultaneous development of techniques for:
•
•
•

genetic transformation of Escherichia coli;
cutting and joining DNA molecules;
monitoring the cutting and joining reactions.

In order to explain the significance of these developments we must first consider the essential requirements of a successful gene-manipulation procedure.

per genome. Such molecules are called replicons.
Fragments of DNA are not replicons and in the
absence of replication will be diluted out of their host
cells. It should be noted that, even if a DNA molecule
contains an origin of replication, this may not function in a foreign host cell.
There is an additional, subsequent problem. If the
early experiments were to proceed, a method was
required for assessing the fate of the donor DNA.
In particular, in circumstances where the foreign
DNA was maintained because it had become integrated in the host DNA, a method was required for
mapping the foreign DNA and the surrounding host
sequences.

Three technical problems had to be solved
before in vitro gene manipulation was
possible on a routine basis

A number of basic techniques are common to
most gene-cloning experiments

Before the advent of modern gene-manipulation
methods there had been many early attempts at
transforming pro- and eukaryotic cells with foreign
DNA. But, in general, little progress could be made.
The reasons for this are as follows. Let us assume that
the exogenous DNA is taken up by the recipient cells.
There are then two basic difficulties. First, where
detection of uptake is dependent on gene expression,
failure could be due to lack of accurate transcription
or translation. Secondly, and more importantly, the
exogenous DNA may not be maintained in the transformed cells. If the exogenous DNA is integrated into
the host genome, there is no problem. The exact
mechanism whereby this integration occurs is not
clear and it is usually a rare event. However this
occurs, the result is that the foreign DNA sequence
becomes incorporated into the host cell’s genetic
material and will subsequently be propagated as part
of that genome. If, however, the exogenous DNA
fails to be integrated, it will probably be lost during
subsequent multiplication of the host cells. The reason for this is simple. In order to be replicated, DNA
molecules must contain an origin of replication, and
in bacteria and viruses there is usually only one

If fragments of DNA are not replicated, the obvious
solution is to attach them to a suitable replicon. Such
replicons are known as vectors or cloning vehicles.
Small plasmids and bacteriophages are the most
suitable vectors for they are replicons in their own
right, their maintenance does not necessarily require integration into the host genome and their
DNA can be readily isolated in an intact form. The
different plasmids and phages which are used as
vectors are described in detail in Chapters 4 and 5.
Suffice it to say at this point that initially plasmids
and phages suitable as vectors were only found in
E. coli. An important consequence follows from the
use of a vector to carry the foreign DNA: simple
methods become available for purifying the vector
molecule, complete with its foreign DNA insert, from
transformed host cells. Thus not only does the vector
provide the replicon function, but it also permits the
easy bulk preparation of the foreign DNA sequence
free from host-cell DNA.
Composite molecules in which foreign DNA has
been inserted into a vector molecule are sometimes
called DNA chimeras because of their analogy with
the Chimaera of mythology – a creature with the head

16

CHAPTER 2

of a lion, body of a goat, and tail of a serpent. The construction of such composite or artificial recombinant
molecules has also been termed genetic engineering
or gene manipulation because of the potential for
creating novel genetic combinations by biochemical
means. The process has also been termed molecular
cloning or gene cloning because a line of genetically
identical organisms, all of which contain the composite molecule, can be propagated and grown in
bulk, hence amplifying the composite molecule and
any gene product whose synthesis it directs.
Although conceptually very simple, cloning of
a fragment of foreign, or passenger, or target DNA
in a vector demands that the following can be
accomplished:
The vector DNA must be purified and cut open.
The passenger DNA must be inserted into the
vector molecule to create the artificial recombinant. DNA joining reactions must therefore be
performed. Methods for cutting and joining DNA
molecules are now so sophisticated that they
warrant a chapter of their own (Chapter 3).
• The cutting and joining reactions must be readily
monitored. This is achieved by the use of gel
electrophoresis.
• Finally, the artificial recombinant must be
introduced into E. coli or another host cell
(transformation).

kb pairs
21.226

7.421
5.804
5.643
4.878

3.530

–

•
•

Further details on the use of gel electrophoresis
and transformation of E. coli are given in the next
section. As we have noted, the necessary techniques
became available at about the same time and quickly
led to many cloning experiments, the first of which
were reported in 1972 (Jackson et al. 1972, Lobban
& Kaiser 1973).
Gel electrophoresis is used to separate
different nucleic acid molecules on the
basis of their size
The progress of the first experiments on cutting and
joining of DNA molecules was monitored by velocity
sedimentation in sucrose gradients. However, this
has been entirely superseded by gel electrophoresis.
Gel electrophoresis is not only used as an analytical
method, it is also routinely used preparatively for
the purification of specific DNA fragments. The gel
is composed of polyacrylamide or agarose. Agarose is
convenient for separating DNA fragments ranging
in size from a few hundred base pairs to about 20 kb

+
Fig. 2.1 Electrophoresis of DNA in agarose gels. The
direction of migration is indicated by the arrow. DNA bands
have been visualized by soaking the gel in a solution of
ethidium bromide (see Fig. 2.3), which complexes with
DNA by intercalating between stacked base pairs, and
photographing the orange fluorescence which results
upon ultraviolet irradiation.

(Fig. 2.1). Polyacrylamide is preferred for smaller
DNA fragments.
The mechanism responsible for the separation
of DNA molecules by molecular weight during gel
electrophoresis is not well understood (Holmes &
Stellwagen 1990). The migration of the DNA molecules through the pores of the matrix must play an
important role in molecular-weight separations since
the electrophoretic mobility of DNA in free solution is
independent of molecular weight. An agarose gel is
a complex network of polymeric molecules whose
average pore size depends on the buffer composition
and the type and concentration of agarose used. DNA
movement through the gel was originally thought to
resemble the motion of a snake (reptation). However,
real-time fluorescence microscopy of stained molecules undergoing electrophoresis has revealed more
subtle dynamics (Schwartz & Koval 1989, Smith et al.
1989). DNA molecules display elastic behavior by
stretching in the direction of the applied field and
then contracting into dense balls. The larger the pore
size of the gel, the greater the ball of DNA which can
pass through and hence the larger the molecules

17

Basic techniques

which can be separated. Once the globular volume of
the DNA molecule exceeds the pore size, the DNA
molecule can only pass through by reptation. This
occurs with molecules about 20 kb in size and it is
difficult to separate molecules larger than this without recourse to pulsed electrical fields.
In pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) (Schwartz
& Cantor 1984) molecules as large as 10 Mb can be
separated in agarose gels. This is achieved by causing the DNA to periodically alter its direction of
migration by regular changes in the orientation of
the electric field with respect to the gel. With each
change in the electric-field orientation, the DNA
must realign its axis prior to migrating in the new
direction. Electric-field parameters, such as the
direction, intensity, and duration of the electric field,
are set independently for each of the different fields
and are chosen so that the net migration of the DNA
is down the gel. The difference between the direction
of migration induced by each of the electric fields is
the reorientation angle and corresponds to the angle
that the DNA must turn as it changes its direction of
migration each time the fields are switched.
A major disadvantage of PFGE, as originally described, is that the samples do not run in straight
lines. This makes subsequent analysis difficult. This
problem has been overcome by the development of
improved methods for alternating the electrical field.
The most popular of these is contour-clamped homogeneous electrical-field (CHEF) electrophoresis (Chu
et al. 1986). In early CHEF-type systems (Fig. 2.2) the
reorientation angle was fixed at 120°. However, in
newer systems, the reorientation angle can be varied
and it has been found that for whole-yeast chromosomes the migration rate is much faster with an
angle of 106° (Birren et al. 1988). Fragments of

Migration of DNA

A–

B–

120°

B+

Fig. 2.2 Schematic representation of CHEF (contourclamped homogeneous electrical field) pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis.

A+

NH2

N⊕
H2 N

Fig. 2.3

Br –
C2H5

Ethidium bromide.

DNA as large as 200–300 kb are routinely handled
in genomics work and these can be separated in a
matter of hours using CHEF systems with a reorientation angle of 90° or less (Birren & Lai 1994).
Aaij and Borst (1972) showed that the migration rates of DNA molecules were inversely proportional to the logarithms of their molecular weights.
Subsequently, Southern (1979a,b) showed that plotting fragment length or molecular weight against
the reciprocal of mobility gives a straight line over a
wider range than the semilogarithmic plot. In any
event, gel electrophoresis is frequently performed
with marker DNA fragments of known size, which
allows accurate size determination of an unknown
DNA molecule by interpolation. A particular advantage of gel electrophoresis is that the DNA bands can
be readily detected at high sensitivity. Traditionally,
the bands of DNA have been stained with the intercalating dye ethidium bromide (Fig. 2.3) and as little
as 0.05 µg of DNA can be detected as visible fluorescence when the gel is illuminated with ultraviolet
light. A major disadvantage of ethidium bromide is
that it is mutagenic in various laboratory tests and
by inference is a potential carcinogen. To overcome
this problem a new fluorescent DNA stain called
SYBR SafeTM has been developed.
In addition to resolving DNA fragments of different lengths, gel electrophoresis can be used to
separate different molecular configurations of a DNA
molecule. Examples of this are given in Chapter 4
(see p. 56). Gel electrophoresis can also be used for
investigating protein–nucleic acid interactions in
the so-called gel retardation or band shift assay. It is
based on the observation that binding of a protein
to DNA fragments usually leads to a reduction in
electrophoretic mobility. The assay typically involves
the addition of protein to linear double-stranded DNA
fragments, separation of complex and naked DNA by
gel electrophoresis and visualization. A review of the
physical basis of electrophoretic mobility shifts and
their application is provided by Lane et al. (1992).

18

CHAPTER 2

Immobilization of nucleic acids

Weight < 0.75 kg
Glass plate

• Southern blot
• Northern blot
• Dot blot
• Colony/plaque lift

Paper tissues
3 sheets filter paper

Pre-hybridization

Membrane
Gel

Labeled DNA
or RNA probe
Hybridization

Removal of probe
prior to reprobing

Stringency washes

Detection

Fig. 2.4 Overview of nucleic acid blotting and hybridization
(reproduced courtesy of Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).

Blotting is used to transfer nucleic acids from
gels to membranes for further analysis
Nucleic acid labeling and hybridization on membranes have formed the basis for a range of experimental techniques central to recent advances in our
understanding of the organization and expression
of the genetic material. These techniques may be
applied in the isolation and quantification of specific
nucleic acid sequences and in the study of their organization, intracellular localization, expression, and
regulation. A variety of specific applications includes
the diagnosis of infectious and inherited disease.
Each of these topics is covered in depth in subsequent
chapters.
An overview of the steps involved in nucleic acid
blotting and membrane hybridization procedures is
shown in Fig. 2.4. Blotting describes the immobilization of sample nucleic acids on to a solid support,
generally nylon or nitrocellulose membranes. The
blotted nucleic acids are then used as “targets” in
subsequent hybridization experiments. The main
blotting procedures are:
•
•
•

blotting of nucleic acids from gels;
dot and slot blotting;
colony and plaque blotting.

Colony and plaque blotting are described in detail on
p. 111 and dot and slot blotting in Chapter 6.

Plastic tray

Fig. 2.5

A typical capillary blotting apparatus.

Southern blotting is the method used to
transfer DNA from agarose gels to membranes
so that the compositional properties of the
DNA can be analyzed
The original method of blotting was developed by
Southern (1975, 1979b) for detecting fragments in
an agarose gel that are complementary to a given
RNA or DNA sequence. In this procedure, referred to
as Southern blotting, the agarose gel is mounted on
a filter-paper wick which dips into a reservoir containing transfer buffer (Fig. 2.5). The hybridization
membrane is sandwiched between the gel and a
stack of paper towels (or other absorbent material),
which serves to draw the transfer buffer through the
gel by capillary action. The DNA molecules are carried out of the gel by the buffer flow and immobilized
on the membrane. Initially, the membrane material
used was nitrocellulose. The main drawback with
this membrane is its fragile nature. Supported nylon
membranes have since been developed which have
greater binding capacity for nucleic acids in addition
to high tensile strength.
For efficient Southern blotting, gel pretreatment is
important. Large DNA fragments (>10 kb) require a
longer transfer time than short fragments. To allow
uniform transfer of a wide range of DNA fragment
sizes, the electrophoresed DNA is exposed to a short
depurination treatment (0.25 mol/l HCl) followed
by alkali. This shortens the DNA fragments by alkaline hydrolysis at depurinated sites. It also denatures
the fragments prior to transfer, ensuring that they
are in the single-stranded state and accessible for
probing. Finally, the gel is equilibrated in neutralizing solution prior to blotting. An alternative method
uses positively charged nylon membranes, which

Basic techniques

remove the need for extended gel pretreatment.
In this case, the DNA is transferred in native (nondenatured) form and then alkali-denatured in situ on
the membrane.
After transfer, the nucleic acid needs to be fixed
to the membrane and a number of methods are
available. Oven baking at 80°C is the recommended
method for nitrocellulose membranes and this can
also be used with nylon membranes. Due to the
flammable nature of nitrocellulose, it is important
that it is baked in a vacuum oven. An alternative
fixation method utilizes ultraviolet cross-linking. It
is based on the formation of cross-links between a
small fraction of the thymine residues in the DNA
and positively charged amino groups on the surface
of nylon membranes. A calibration experiment must
be performed to determine the optimal fixation period.
Following the fixation step, the membrane is
placed in a solution of labeled (radioactive or nonradioactive) RNA, single-stranded DNA, or oligodeoxynucleotide which is complementary in sequence
to the blot-transferred DNA band or bands to be
detected. Conditions are chosen so that the labeled
nucleic acid hybridizes with the DNA on the membrane. Since this labeled nucleic acid is used to detect
and locate the complementary sequence, it is called
the probe. Conditions are chosen which maximize the
rate of hybridization, compatible with a low background of non-specific binding on the membrane
(see Box 2.1). After the hybridization reaction has
been carried out, the membrane is washed to remove
unbound radioactivity and regions of hybridization
are detected autoradiographically by placing the
membrane in contact with X-ray film (see Box 2.2).
A common approach is to carry out the hybridization under conditions of relatively low stringency
which permit a high rate of hybridization, followed
by a series of post-hybridization washes of increasing stringency (i.e. higher temperature or, more
commonly, lower ionic strength). Autoradiography
following each washing stage will reveal any DNA
bands that are related to, but not perfectly complementary with, the probe and will also permit an
estimate of the degree of mismatching to be made.
The Southern blotting methodology can be
extremely sensitive. It can be applied to mapping
restriction sites around a single-copy gene sequence
in a complex genome such as that of humans
(Fig. 2.6), and when a “mini-satellite” probe is used it
can be applied forensically to minute amounts of
DNA (see p. 335).

19

Northern blotting is a variant of Southern
blotting that is used for RNA analysis
Southern’s technique has been of enormous value,
but it was thought that it could not be applied
directly to the blot-transfer of RNAs separated by gel
electrophoresis, since RNA was found not to bind
to nitrocellulose. Alwine et al. (1979) therefore
devised a procedure in which RNA bands are blottransferred from the gel on to chemically reactive
paper, where they are bound covalently. The reactive paper is prepared by diazotization of aminobenzyloxymethyl paper (creating diazobenzyloxymethyl
(DBM) paper), which itself can be prepared from
Whatman 540 paper by a series of uncomplicated
reactions. Once covalently bound, the RNA is available for hybridization with radiolabeled DNA probes.
As before, hybridizing bands are located by autoradiography. Alwine et al.’s method thus extends
that of Southern and for this reason it has acquired
the jargon term northern blotting.
Subsequently it was found that RNA bands can
indeed be blotted on to nitrocellulose membranes
under appropriate conditions (Thomas 1980) and
suitable nylon membranes have been developed.
Because of the convenience of these more recent
methods, which do not require freshly activated
paper, the use of DBM paper has been superseded.
Western blotting is used to transfer proteins
from acrylamide gels to membranes
The term “western” blotting (Burnette 1981) refers
to a procedure which does not directly involve nucleic
acids, but which is of importance in gene manipulation. It involves the transfer of electrophoresed
protein bands from a polyacrylamide gel on to a
membrane of nitrocellulose or nylon, to which they
bind strongly (Gershoni & Palade 1982, Renart &
Sandoval 1984). The bound proteins are then available for analysis by a variety of specific protein–
ligand interactions. Most commonly, antibodies are
used to detect specific antigens. Lectins have been
used to identify glycoproteins. In these cases the
probe may itself be labeled with radioactivity, or
some other “tag” may be employed. Often, however,
the probe is unlabeled and is itself detected in a
“sandwich” reaction, using a second molecule which
is labeled, for instance a species-specific second antibody, or protein A of Staphylococcus aureus (which
binds to certain subclasses of IgG antibodies), or

20

CHAPTER 2

Box 2.1 Hybridization of nucleic acids on membranes
The hybridization of nucleic acids on
membranes is a widely used technique in gene
manipulation and analysis. Unlike solution
hybridizations, membrane hybridizations tend
not to proceed to completion. One reason for
this is that some of the bound nucleic acid is
embedded in the membrane and is

inaccessible to the probe. Prolonged
incubations may not generate any significant
increase in detection sensitivity.
The composition of the hybridization buffer
can greatly affect the speed of the reaction
and the sensitivity of detection. The key
components of these buffers are shown below:

Rate enhancers

Dextran sulfate and other polymers act as volume excluders to increase
both the rate and the extent of hybridization

Detergents and blocking agents

Dried milk, heparin, and detergents such as sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS)
have been used to depress non-specific binding of the probe to the
membrane. Denhardt’s solution (Denhardt 1966) uses Ficoll,
polyvinylpyrrolidone, and bovine serum albumin

Denaturants

Urea or formamide can be used to depress the melting temperature of
the hybrid so that reduced temperatures of hybridization can be used

Heterologous DNA

This can reduce non-specific binding of probes to non-homologous DNA
on the blot

Stringency control
Stringency can be regarded as the specificity
with which a particular target sequence is
detected by hybridization to a probe.
Thus, at high stringency, only completely
complementary sequences will be bound,
whereas low-stringency conditions will allow
hybridization to partially matched sequences.
Stringency is most commonly controlled by
the temperature and salt concentration in the
post-hybridization washes, although these
parameters can also be utilized in the
hybridization step. In practice, the stringency
washes are performed under successively
more stringent conditions (lower salt or
higher temperature) until the desired result
is obtained.
The melting temperature (Tm) of a
probe–target hybrid can be calculated to
provide a starting point for the determination
of correct stringency. The Tm is the
temperature at which the probe and target
are 50% dissociated. For probes longer than
100 base pairs:
Tm = 81.5°C + 16.6 log M + 0.41 (% G + C)

where M = ionic strength of buffer in moles/
liter. With long probes, the hybridization is
usually carried out at Tm − 25°C. When the
probe is used to detect partially matched
sequences, the hybridization temperature
is reduced by 1°C for every 1% sequence
divergence between probe and target.
Oligonucleotides can give a more rapid
hybridization rate than long probes as they
can be used at a higher molarity. Also,
in situations where target is in excess to
the probe, for example dot blots, the
hybridization rate is diffusion-limited and
longer probes diffuse more slowly than
oligonucleotides. It is standard practice
to use oligonucleotides to analyze putative
mutants following a site-directed mutagenesis
experiment where the difference between
parental and mutant progeny is often only
a single base-pair change.
The availability of the exact sequence
of oligonucleotides allows conditions for
hybridization and stringency washing to
be tightly controlled so that the probe will
only remain hybridized when it is 100%
homologous to the target. Stringency is
commonly controlled by adjusting the
continued

21

Basic techniques

Box 2.1 continued
temperature of the wash buffer. The “Wallace
rule” (Lay Thein & Wallace 1986) is used to
determine the appropriate stringency wash
temperature:

maximize hybridization specificity.
Consideration should be given to:
•

Tm = 4 × (number of GC base pairs) +
2 × (number of AT base pairs)
In filter hybridizations with oligonucleotide
probes, the hybridization step is usually
performed at 5°C below Tm for perfectly
matched sequences. For every mismatched
base pair, a further 5°C reduction is necessary
to maintain hybrid stability.
The design of oligonucleotides for
hybridization experiments is critical to

•

probe length – the longer the
oligonucleotide, the less chance there is
of it binding to sequences other than the
desired target sequence under conditions
of high stringency;
oligonucleotide composition – the
GC content will influence the stability
of the resultant hybrid and hence the
determination of the appropriate
stringency washing conditions. Also the
presence of any non-complementary bases
will have an effect on the hybridization
conditions.

Long DNA
fragments

Gene X
Restriction
endonuclease

Gel
electrophoresis

DNA
fragments
Short DNA
fragments

Genomic DNA

Genomic DNA

–

+

Agarose gel
(1) Denature in alkali
(2) Blot-transfer, bake

Autoradiography

(1) Hybridize nitrocellulose
with radioactive probe

Nitrocellulose

(2) Wash
Photographic
film

Images correspond only to
fragments containing gene X
sequences – estimate
fragment sizes from mobility

Radioactive RNA or
denatured DNA containing
sequences complementary
to gene X (radioactive probe)

Single-stranded
DNA fragments

Fig. 2.6 Mapping restriction sites around a hypothetical gene sequence in total genomic DNA by the Southern blot method.
Genomic DNA is cleaved with a restriction endonuclease into hundreds of thousands of fragments of various sizes.
The fragments are separated according to size by gel electrophoresis and blot-transferred on to nitrocellulose paper. Highly
radioactive RNA or denatured DNA complementary in sequence to gene X is applied to the nitrocellulose paper bearing the
blotted DNA. The radiolabeled RNA or DNA will hybridize with gene X sequences and can be detected subsequently by
autoradiography, so enabling the sizes of restriction fragments containing gene X sequences to be estimated from their
electrophoretic mobility. By using several restriction endonucleases singly and in combination, a map of restriction sites
in and around gene X can be built up.

22

CHAPTER 2

Box 2.2 The principles of autoradiography
The localization and recording of a
radiolabel within a solid specimen is known as
autoradiography and involves the production
of an image in a photographic emulsion.
Such emulsions consist of silver halide crystals
suspended in a clear phase composed mainly
of gelatin. When a b-particle or g-ray from a
radionuclide passes through the emulsion,
the silver ions are converted to silver atoms.
This results in a latent image being produced,
which is converted to a visible image when
the image is developed. Development is a
system of amplification in which the silver
atoms cause the entire silver halide crystal
to be reduced to metallic silver. Unexposed
crystals are removed by dissolution in fixer,
giving an autoradiographic image which
represents the distribution of radiolabel in
the original sample.
In direct autoradiography, the sample is
placed in intimate contact with the film and
the radioactive emissions produce black areas
on the developed autoradiograph. It is best

suited to detection of weak- to mediumstrength b-emitting radionuclides (3H, 14C,
35
S). Direct autoradiography is not suited to
the detection of highly energetic b-particles,
such as those from 32P, or for g-rays emitted
from isotopes like 125I. These emissions pass
through and beyond the film, with the
majority of the energy being wasted. Both
32
P and 125I are best detected by indirect
autoradiography.
Indirect autoradiography describes the
technique by which emitted energy is
converted to light by means of a scintillator,
using fluorography or intensifying screens. In
fluorography the sample is impregnated with
a liquid scintillator. The radioactive emissions
transfer their energy to the scintillator
molecules, which then emit photons
which expose the photographic emulsion.
Fluorography is mostly used to improve the
detection of weak b-emitters (Fig. B2.1).
Intensifying screens are sheets of a solid
inorganic scintillator which are placed behind

35S
+

3H
−

+

−

Fig. B2.1 Autoradiographs showing the detection of 35S- and 3H-labeled proteins in acrylamide gels with (+) and without
(−) fluorography. (Photo courtesy of Amersham Pharmacia Biotech.)
continued

23

Basic techniques

Box 2.2

continued

the film. Any emissions passing through the
photographic emulsion are absorbed by the
screen and converted to light, effectively
superimposing a photographic image upon
the direct autoradiographic image.
The gain in sensitivity which is achieved by
use of indirect autoradiography is offset by
nonlinearity of film response. A single hit by a
b-particle or g-ray can produce hundreds of
silver atoms, but a single hit by a photon of
light produces only a single silver atom.
Although two or more silver atoms in a silver
halide crystal are stable, a single silver atom is
unstable and reverts to a silver ion very rapidly.
This means that the probability of a second

A

photon being captured before the first silver
atom has reverted is greater for large amounts
of radioactivity than for small amounts. Hence
small amounts of radioactivity are underrepresented with the use of fluorography
and intensifying screens. This problem can be
overcome by a combination of pre-exposing
a film to an instantaneous flash of light (preflashing) and exposing the autoradiograph at
−70°C. Pre-flashing provides many of the silver
halide crystals of the film with a stable pair of
silver atoms. Lowering the temperature to
−70°C increases the stability of a single silver
atom, increasing the time available to capture
a second photon (Fig. B2.2).

B

C

Fig. B2.2 The improvement in sensitivity of detection of 125I-labeled IgG by autoradiography obtained by using an
intensifying screen and pre-flashed film. A, no screen and no pre-flashing; B, screen present but film not pre-flashed;
C, use of screen and pre-flashed film. (Photo courtesy of Amersham Pharmacia Biotech.)

24

CHAPTER 2

streptavidin (which binds to antibody probes that
have been biotinylated). These second molecules
may be labeled in a variety of ways with radioactive,
enzyme, or fluorescent tags. An advantage of the
sandwich approach is that a single preparation of
labeled second molecule can be employed as a general detector for different probes. For example, an
antiserum may be raised in rabbits which reacts with
a range of mouse immunoglobins. Such a rabbit
anti-mouse (RAM) antiserum may be radio-labeled
and used in a number of different applications to
identify polypeptide bands probed with different,
specific, monoclonal antibodies, each monoclonal
antibody being of mouse origin. The sandwich
method may also give a substantial increase in sensitivity, owing to the multivalent binding of antibody
molecules.
A number of techniques have been devised to
speed up and simplify the blotting process
The original blotting technique employed capillary
blotting but nowadays the blotting is usually accomplished by electrophoretic transfer of polypeptides
from an SDS-polyacrylamide gel on to the membrane (Towbin et al. 1979). Electrophoretic transfer
is also the method of choice for transferring DNA or
RNA from low-pore-size polyacrylamide gels. It can
also be used with agarose gels. However, in this case,
the rapid electrophoretic transfer process requires
high currents, which can lead to extensive heating
effects, resulting in distortion of agarose gels. The
use of an external cooling system is necessary to
prevent this.
Another alternative to capillary blotting is vacuumdriven blotting (Olszewska & Jones 1988), for which
several devices are commercially available. Vacuum
blotting has several advantages over capillary or
electrophoretic transfer methods: transfer is very
rapid and gel treatment can be performed in situ on
the vacuum apparatus. This ensures minimal gel
handling and, together with the rapid transfer, prevents significant DNA diffusion.
The ability to transform E. coli with DNA is an
essential prerequisite for most experiments
on gene manipulation
Early attempts to achieve transformation of E. coli
were unsuccessful and it was generally believed that
E. coli was refractory to transformation. However,
Mandel and Higa (1970) found that treatment with

CaCl2 allowed E. coli cells to take up DNA from bacteriophage λ. A few years later Cohen et al. (1972)
showed that CaCl2-treated E. coli cells are also effective recipients for plasmid DNA. Almost any strain of
E. coli can be transformed with plasmid DNA, albeit
with varying efficiency, whereas it was thought that
only recBC− mutants could be transformed with
linear bacterial DNA (Cosloy & Oishi 1973). Later,
Hoekstra et al. (1980) showed that recBC+ cells can
be transformed with linear DNA, but the efficiency is
only 10% of that in otherwise isogenic recBC− cells.
Transformation of recBC− cells with linear DNA is
only possible if the cells are rendered recombinationproficient by the addition of a sbcA or sbcB mutation.
The fact that the recBC gene product is an exonuclease explains the difference in transformation efficiency
of circular and linear DNA in recBC+ cells.
As will be seen from the next chapter, many bacteria contain restriction systems which can influence
the efficiency of transformation. Although the complete function of these restriction systems is not yet
known, one role they do play is the recognition and
degradation of foreign DNA. For this reason it is
usual to use a restriction-deficient strain of E. coli as a
transformable host.
Since transformation of E. coli is an essential step
in many cloning experiments, it is desirable that it be
as efficient as possible. Several groups of workers
have examined the factors affecting the efficiency
of transformation. It has been found that E. coli
cells and plasmid DNA interact productively in an
environment of calcium ions and low temperature
(0–5°C), and that a subsequent heat shock (37–
45°C) is important, but not strictly required. Several
other factors, especially the inclusion of metal ions in
addition to calcium, have been shown to stimulate
the process.
A very simple, moderately efficient transformation
procedure for use with E. coli involves resuspending
log-phase cells in ice-cold 50 mmol/l calcium chloride at about 1010 cells/ml and keeping them on ice
for about 30 min. Plasmid DNA (0.1 µg) is then
added to a small aliquot (0.2 ml) of these now competent (i.e. competent for transformation) cells, and the
incubation on ice continued for a further 30 min,
followed by a heat shock of 2 min at 42°C. The cells
are then usually transferred to nutrient medium and
incubated for some time (30 min to 1 h) to allow
phenotypic properties conferred by the plasmid to be
expressed, e.g. antibiotic resistance commonly used
as a selectable marker for plasmid-containing cells.
(This so-called phenotypic lag may not need to be

Basic techniques

taken into consideration with high-level ampicillin
resistance. With this marker, significant resistance
builds up very rapidly, and ampicillin exerts its effect
on cell-wall biosynthesis only in cells which have
progressed into active growth.) Finally the cells are
plated out on selective medium. Just why such a
transformation procedure is effective is not fully
understood (Huang & Reusch 1995). The calcium
chloride affects the cell wall and may also be responsible for binding DNA to the cell surface. The
actual uptake of DNA is stimulated by the brief
heat shock.
Hanahan (1983) re-examined the factors that
affect the efficiency of transformation, and devised a
set of conditions for optimal efficiency (expressed as
transformants per µg plasmid DNA) applicable to
most E. coli K12 strains. Typically, efficiencies of 107
to 109 transformants/µg can be achieved depending
on the strain of E. coli and the method used (Liu &
Rashidbaigi 1990). Ideally, one wishes to make a
large batch of competent cells and store them frozen
for future use. Unfortunately, competent cells made
by the Hanahan procedure rapidly lose their competence on storage. Inoue et al. (1990) have optimized
the conditions for the preparation of competent cells.
Not only could they store cells for up to 40 days at
−70°C while retaining efficiencies of 1–5 × 109 cfu/
µg, but competence was affected only minimally by
salts in the DNA preparation.
There are many enzymic activities in E. coli which
can destroy incoming DNA from non-homologous
sources (see Chapter 3) and reduce the transformation efficiency. Large DNAs transform less efficiently,
on a molar basis, than small DNAs. Even with such
improved transformation procedures, certain potential gene-cloning experiments requiring large numbers of clones are not reliable. One approach which
can be used to circumvent the problem of low transformation efficiencies is to package recombinant
DNA into virus particles in vitro. A particular form of
this approach, the use of cosmids, is described in
detail in Chapter 5. Another approach is electroporation, which is described below.
Electroporation is a means of introducing DNA
into cells without making them competent for
transformation
A rapid and simple technique for introducing cloned
genes into a wide variety of microbial, plant, and
animal cells, including E. coli, is electroporation.
This technique depends on the original observation

25

by Zimmerman & Vienken (1983) that high-voltage
electric pulses can induce cell plasma membranes to
fuse. Subsequently it was found that, when subjected
to electric shock, the cells take up exogenous DNA
from the suspending solution. A proportion of these
cells become stably transformed and can be selected
if a suitable marker gene is carried on the transforming DNA. Many different factors affect the efficiency
of electroporation, including temperature, various
electric-field parameters (voltage, resistance, and
capacitance), topological form of the DNA, and various host-cell factors (genetic background, growth
conditions, and post-pulse treatment). Some of these
factors have been reviewed by Hanahan et al.
(1991).
With E. coli, electroporation has been found to
give plasmid transformation efficiencies (109 cfu/µg
DNA) comparable with the best CaCl2 methods
(Dower et al. 1988). More recently, Zhu and Dean
(1999) have reported 10-fold higher transformation
efficiencies with plasmids (9 × 109 transformants/
µg) by co-precipitating the DNA with transfer RNA
(tRNA) prior to electroporation. With conventional
CaCl2-mediated transformation, the efficiency falls
off rapidly as the size of the DNA molecule increases
and is almost negligible when the size exceeds 50 kb.
While size also affects the efficiency of electroporation (Sheng et al. 1995), it is possible to get transformation efficiencies of 106 cfu/µg DNA with
molecules as big as 240 kb. Molecules three to four
times this size also can be electroporated successfully. This is important because much of the work
on mapping and sequencing of genomes demands
the ability to handle large fragments of DNA (see
Chapter 17).
The ability to transform organisms other than
E. coli with recombinant DNA enables genes to
be studied in different host backgrounds
Although E. coli often remains the host organism of
choice for cloning experiments, many other hosts
are now used, and with them transformation may
still be a critical step. In the case of Gram-positive
bacteria, the two most important groups of organisms are Bacillus spp. and actinomycetes. That B.
subtilis is naturally competent for transformation
has been known for a long time and hence the genetics
of this organism are fairly advanced. For this reason
B. subtilis is a particularly attractive alternative
prokaryotic cloning host. The significant features of
transformation with this organism are detailed in

26

CHAPTER 2

Chapter 10. Of particular relevance here is that it is
possible to transform protoplasts of B. subtilis, a
technique which leads to improved transformation
frequencies. A similar technique is used to transform
actinomycetes, and recently it has been shown that
the frequency can be increased considerably by first
entrapping the DNA in liposomes, which then fuse
with the host-cell membrane.
In later chapters we discuss ways, including electroporation, in which cloned DNA can be introduced
into eukaryotic cells. With animal cells there is no
great problem as only the membrane has to be
crossed. In the case of yeast, protoplasts are required
(Hinnen et al. 1978). With higher plants one strategy that has been adopted is either to package the
DNA in a plant virus or to use a bacterial plant
pathogen as the donor. It has also been shown that
protoplasts prepared from plant cells are competent
for transformation. A further remarkable approach
that has been demonstrated with plants and animals
(Klein & Fitzpatrick-McElligott 1993) is the use of
microprojectiles shot from a gun (p. 291).
Animal cells and protoplasts of yeast, plant, and
bacterial cells are susceptible to transformation by
liposomes (Deshayes et al. 1985). A simple transformation system has been developed which makes use
of liposomes prepared from a cationic lipid (Felgner
et al. 1987). Small unilamellar (single-bilayer) vesicles are produced. DNA in solution spontaneously
and efficiently complexes with these liposomes (in
contrast to previously employed liposome encapsidation procedures involving non-ionic lipids). The
positively charged liposomes not only complex with
DNA, but also bind to cultured animal cells and are
efficient in transforming them, probably by fusion
with the plasma membrane. The use of liposomes
as a transformation or transfection system is called
lipofection.

Cycle 1
5’+
3’–

Denaturation by
heat followed by
primer annealing

5’+

3’
and
5’

3’–

3’

5’

3’

5’
DNA synthesis
(primer extension)

5’

3’
3’

and

5’

5’

3’

3’

5’
Denaturation by heat followed by primer
annealing and DNA synthesis

Cycle 2
5’

3’
3’

+
5’

3’

+
5’
3’

+

5’
3’
5’
5’

3’
3’

5’

3’

5’

Denaturation by heat followed by primer
annealing and DNA synthesis
Cycle 3
5’
3’

3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

5’

3’
5’

5’
3’

5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

5’

3’

3’

5’
3’

Fig. 2.7 (right) The polymerase chain reaction. In cycle 1
two primers anneal to denatured DNA at opposite sides of the
target region, and are extended by DNA polymerase to give
new strands of variable length. In cycle 2, the original strands
and the new strands from cycle 1 are separated, yielding a
total of four primer sites with which primers anneal. The
primers that are hybridized to the new strands from cycle 1
are extended by polymerase as far as the end of the template,
leading to a precise copy of the target region. In cycle 3,
double-stranded DNA molecules are produced (highlighted in
color) that are precisely identical to the target region. Further
cycles lead to exponential doubling of the target region. The
original DNA strands and the variably extended strands
become negligible after the exponential increase of target
fragments.

3’ Double stranded
5’ DNA target

3’
5’

Repeated cycles lead to exponential
doubling of the target sequence

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has
revolutionized the way that biologists
manipulate and analyze DNA
The impact of the PCR upon molecular biology has
been profound. The reaction is easily performed, and
leads to the amplification of specific DNA sequences

27

Basic techniques

by an enormous factor. From a simple basic principle,
many variations have been developed with applications throughout gene technology (Erlich 1989,
Innis et al. 1990). Very importantly, the PCR has
revolutionized prenatal diagnosis by allowing tests
to be performed using small samples of fetal tissue.
In forensic science, the enormous sensitivity of PCRbased procedures is exploited in DNA profiling;
following the publicity surrounding Jurassic Park,
virtually everyone is aware of potential applications
in paleontology and archeology. Many other processes
have been described which should produce equivalent results to a PCR (for review, see Landegran
1996) but as yet none has found widespread use.
In many applications of the PCR to gene manipulation, the enormous amplification is secondary to
the aim of altering the amplified sequence. This often
involves incorporating extra sequences at the ends of
the amplified DNA. In this section we shall consider
only the amplification process. The applications of
the PCR will be described in appropriate places later
in the book.
The principle of the PCR is exceedingly simple
First we need to consider the basic PCR. The principle is illustrated in Fig. 2.7. The PCR involves
two oligonucleotide primers, 17–30 nucleotides in
length, which flank the DNA sequence that is to be
amplified. The primers hybridize to opposite strands
of the DNA after it has been denatured, and are
orientated so that DNA synthesis by the polymerase
proceeds through the region between the two primers. The extension reactions create two doublestranded target regions, each of which can again be
denatured ready for a second cycle of hybridization
and extension. The third cycle produces two doublestranded molecules that comprise precisely the
target region in double-stranded form. By repeated
cycles of heat denaturation, primer hybridization
and extension, there follows a rapid exponential
accumulation of the specific target fragment of DNA.
After 22 cycles, an amplification of about 106-fold is
expected (Fig. 2.8), and amplifications of this order
are actually attained in practice.
In the original description of the PCR method
(Mullis & Faloona 1987, Saiki et al. 1988, Mullis
1990), Klenow DNA polymerase was used and,
because of the heat-denaturation step, fresh enzyme
had to be added during each cycle. A breakthrough
came with the introduction of Taq DNA polymerase
(Lawyer et al. 1989) from the thermophilic bacterium Thermus aquaticus. The Taq DNA polymerase

Cycle number

Number of double-stranded
target molecules

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

0
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
8192
16,384
32,768
65,536
131,072
262,144
524,288
1,048,576
2,097,152
4,194,304
8,388,608
16,777,216
33,554,432
67,108,864
134,217,728
268,435,456

Fig. 2.8 Theoretical PCR amplification of a target fragment
with increasing number of cycles.

is resistant to high temperatures and so does not
need to be replenished during the PCR (Erlich et al.
1988, Sakai et al. 1988). Furthermore, by enabling
the extension reaction to be performed at higher
temperatures, the specificity of the primer annealing
is not compromised. As a consequence of employing
the heat-resistant enzyme, the PCR could be automated very simply by placing the assembled reaction
in a heating block with a suitable thermal cycling
program (see Box 2.3).
Recent developments have sought to minimize
amplification times. Such systems have used small
reaction volumes in glass capillaries to give large
surface area-to-volume ratios. This results in almost
instantaneous temperature equilibration and minimal annealing and denaturation times. This, accompanied by temperature ramp rates of 10–20°C/s,
made possible by the use of turbulent forced hot-air
systems to heat the sample, results in an amplification reaction completed in tens of minutes.
While the PCR is simple in concept, practically
there are a large number of variables which can
influence the outcome of the reaction. This is especially important when the method is being used
with rare samples of starting material or if the end
result has diagnostic or forensic implications. For a

28

CHAPTER 2

Box 2.3 The PCR achieves enormous amplifications of specific
target sequence, very simply
The reaction is assembled in a single
tube, and then placed in a thermal cycler
(a programmable heating/cooling block),
as described below.
A typical PCR for amplifying a human
genomic DNA sequence has the following
composition. The reaction volume is 100 ml.

Denaturation
Primer annealing
Extension

Input genomic DNA, 0.1–1 mg
Primer 1, 20 pmol
Primer 2, 20 pmol
20 mmol/l Tris-HCl, pH 8.3 (at 20°C)
1.5 mmol/l magnesium chloride
25 mmol/l potassium chloride
50 mmol/l each deoxynucleoside
triphosphate (dATP, dCTP, dGTP, dTTP)
2 units Taq DNA polymerase

•

A layer of mineral oil is placed over the
reaction mix to prevent evaporation.
The reaction is cycled 25–35 times, with the
following temperature program:

detailed analysis of the factors affecting the PCR, the
reader should consult Pavlov et al. (2004). There
are many substances present in natural samples
(e.g. blood, feces, environmental materials) which
can interfere with the PCR, and ways of eliminating
them have been reviewed by Bickley and Hopkins
(1999).
RT-PCR enables the sequences on a mRNA
molecule to be amplified as DNA
The thermostable polymerase used in the basic PCR
requires a DNA template and hence is limited to the
amplification of DNA samples. There are numerous
instances in which the amplification of RNA would
be preferred. For example, in analyses involving the
differential expression of genes in tissues during
development or the cloning of DNA derived from an
mRNA (complementary DNA or cDNA), particularly
a rare mRNA. In order to apply PCR methodology
to the study of RNA, the RNA sample must first be
reverse-transcribed to cDNA to provide the necessary
DNA template for the thermostable polymerase. This

94°C, 0.5 min
55°C, 1.5 min
72°C, 1 min

Typically, the reaction takes some 2–3 h
overall.
Notes:
The optimal temperature for the annealing
step will depend upon the primers used.
• The pH of the Tris-HCl buffer decreases
markedly with increasing temperature.
The actual pH varies between about 6.8
and 7.8 during the thermal cycle.
• The time taken for each cycle is
considerably longer than 3 min (0.5 + 1.5
+ 1 min), depending upon the rates of
heating and cooling between steps, but
can be reduced considerably by using
turbo systems (p. 27).
• The standard PCR does not efficiently
amplify sequences much longer than
about 3 kb.

process is called reverse transcription (RT), hence
the name RT-PCR.
Avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV) or Moloney
murine leukemia virus (MuLV) reverse transcriptases are generally used to produce a DNA copy of
the RNA template. Various strategies can be adopted
for first-strand cDNA synthesis (Fig. 2.9), and more
are described in Chapter 6.
The basic PCR is not efficient at amplifying
long DNA fragments
Amplification of long DNA fragments is desirable for
numerous applications of gene manipulation. The basic
PCR works well when small fragments are amplified.
The efficiency of amplification and therefore the yield
of amplified fragments decrease significantly as the
size of the amplicon increases over 5 kb. This decrease
in yield of longer amplified fragments is attributable
to partial synthesis across the desired sequence,
which is not a suitable substrate for the subsequent
cycles. This is demonstrated by the presence of
smeared, as opposed to discrete, bands on a gel.

29

Basic techniques

Fig. 2.9 Three
strategies for synthesis
of first-strand cDNA.
(a) Random primer;
(b) oligo (dT) primer;
(c) sequence-specific
primer.

Random primer
5’

A A A A A A A 3’

mRNA
1st strand cDNA

A A A A A A A 3’
T T T T T T T 5’

mRNA
1st strand cDNA

A A A A A A A 3’

mRNA
1st strand cDNA

3’
random primer
Oligo (dT) primer
5’
3’

Sequence-specific primer
5’
3’
primer

Table 2.1 Sources of thermostable DNA
polymerases with proofreading (3′–5′ exonuclease)
activity.

DNA polymerase
Tma
Deep VentTM
Tli
Pfu
Pwo

•
•

Source

•

Thermotoga maritima
Pyrococcus sp.
Thermococcus litoralis
Pyrococcus furiosus
Pyrococcus woesi

•

Barnes (1994) and Cheng et al. (1994a,b) examined the factors affecting the thermostable polymerization across larger regions of DNA and identified
key variables affecting the yield of longer PCR fragments. Most significant of these was the absence
of a 3′–5′ exonuclease (proofreading) activity in Taq
polymerase. Presumably, when the Taq polymerase
misincorporates a deoxynucleoside triphosphate
(dNTP), subsequent extension of the strand either
proceeds very slowly or stops completely. To overcome
this problem, a second thermostable polymerase
with proofreading capability is added. Thermostable
DNA polymerases with proofreading capabilities are
listed in Table 2.1.
The success of a PCR experiment is very
dependent on the choice of experimental
variables
The specificity of the PCR depends crucially upon
the primers. The following factors are important in
choosing effective primers.

•

Primers should be 17 to 30 nucleotides in length.
A GC content of about 50% is ideal. For primers with
a low GC content it is desirable to choose a long
primer so as to avoid a low melting temperature.
Sequences with long runs (i.e. more than three or
four) of a single nucleotide should be avoided.
Primers with significant secondary structure are
undesirable.
There should be no complementarity between the
two primers.

The great majority of primers which conform with
these guidelines can be made to work, although not
all comparable primer sets are equally effective even
under optimized conditions.
In carrying out a PCR it is usual to employ a
hot-start protocol. This entails adding the DNA polymerase after the heat-denaturation step of the first
cycle, the addition taking place at a temperature at
or above the annealing temperature and just prior to
the annealing step of the first cycle. The hot start
overcomes the problem that would arise if the DNA
polymerase were added to complete the assembly
of the PCR reaction mixture at a relatively low temperature. At low temperature, below the desired
hybridization temperature for the primer (typically
in the region 45–60°C), mismatched primers will
form and may be extended somewhat by the polymerase. Once extended, the mismatched primer is
stabilized at the unintended position. Having been
incorporated into the extended DNA during the first
cycle, the primer will hybridize efficiently in subsequent cycles and hence may cause the amplification
of a spurious product.
Alternatives to the hot-start protocol include the use
of Taq polymerase antibodies, which are inactivated

30

CHAPTER 2

as the temperature rises (Taylor & Logan 1995), and
AmpliTaq GoldTM, a modified Taq polymerase that
is inactive until heated to 95°C (Birch 1996). Yet
another means of inactivating Taq DNA polymerase
at ambient temperatures is the SELEX method (systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment). Here the polymerase is reversibly inactivated
by the binding of nanomolar amounts of a 70-mer,
which is itself a poor polymerase substrate and
should not interfere with the amplification primers
(Dang & Jayasena 1996).
In order to minimize further the amplification
of spurious products, the strategy of nested primers
may be deployed. Here the products of an initial PCR
amplification are used to seed a second PCR amplification, in which one or both primers are located
internally with respect to the primers of the first PCR.
Since there is little chance of the spurious products
containing sequences capable of hybridizing with
the second primer set, the PCR with these nested
primers selectively amplifies the sought-after DNA.
As noted above, the Taq DNA polymerase lacks a
3′–5′ proofreading exonuclease. This lack appears to
contribute to errors during PCR amplification due to
misincorporation of nucleotides (Eckert & Kunkel
1990). Partly to overcome this problem, other thermostable DNA polymerases with improved fidelity
have been sought although the Taq DNA polymerase
remains the most widely used enzyme for PCR. In
certain applications, especially where amplified DNA
is cloned, it is important to check the nucleotide
sequence of the cloned product to reveal any mutations that may have occurred during the PCR. The
fidelity of the amplification reaction can be assessed

by cloning, sequencing, and comparing several independently amplified molecules.
By using special instrumentation it is possible
to make the PCR quantitative
There are many applications of the PCR where it
would be advantageous to be able to quantify the
amount of starting material. Theoretically, there is
a quantitative relationship between the amount of
starting material (target sequence) and the amount
of PCR product at any given cycle. In practice, replicate reactions yield different amounts of product,
making quantitation unreliable. Higuchi et al. (1992,
1993) pioneered the use of ethidium bromide to quantify PCR products as they accumulate. Amplification
produces increasing amounts of double-stranded
DNA, which binds ethidium bromide, resulting in an
increase in fluorescence. By plotting the increase in
fluorescence versus cycle number it is possible to
analyze the PCR kinetics in real time (Fig. 2.10). This
is much more satisfactory than analyzing product
accumulation after a fixed number of cycles.
Analysis of Fig. 2.10 shows that the reaction
profile has three stages. First there is an early background phase when the fluorescence does not rise
above the baseline. In the second stage sufficient
product has accumulated to be detected above the
background and the fluorescence increases exponentially. In practice, a fixed fluorescence threshold
is set above the baseline and the parameter CT
(threshold cycle) is defined as the fractional cycle
number at which the fluorescence passes the fixed
threshold.

0.90

Rn+

0.80

Fluorescence (RN)

0.70

Sample

0.60

∆Rn

0.50
0.40

Threshold

0.30

Rn–

No template

0.20

Baseline

0.10
0.00

0

5

10

15 (C T ) 20

25

30

35

40

Cycle number

Fig. 2.10 Schematic representation of a typical DNA amplification plot obtained using real-time PCR. Figure reproduced
courtesy of Applied Biosystems Inc.

31

Basic techniques

29
1000000 copies
300000 copies
100000 copies
30000 copies
10000 copies

27
Threshold cycle (CT)

Fluorescence

5
4
3
2
1
0

Slope = –l/logE

25
23
21
19
17

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

15
4.0

35

4.5

5.0

5.5

6.0

Log initial concentration of DNA

Cycle number

Fig. 2.11 The effect of the initial DNA concentration on the
kinetics of PCR amplification as monitored by an increase in
fluorescence.

Fig. 2.12 A standard curve of CT value versus the logarithm
of the initial DNA concentration calculated from the data
shown in Fig. 2.11. In this example the calculated value of
E is 1.73.

Once CT is reached, the amplification reaction is
described by the equation:

•
•

Tn = T0(E)n

•

where Tn is the amount of target sequence at cycle
n, T0 is the initial amount of target, and E is the
efficiency of amplification. In the final stage the reaction efficiency declines until no more product
accumulates.
The value of CT will depend on the starting concentration of target DNA: the lower the initial concentration the more cycles will be required to reach the
threshold (Fig. 2.11). With the current generation of
real-time PCR instruments about 1010 copies of PCR
product are required to produce a signal above background. If you start with one million copies of target
DNA and have an amplification efficiency of 1.9 then
using the above equation it can be calculated that a
signal will first be seen at cycle 14. On the other
hand, if you start with 1000 copies you will first see a
signal at cycle 25. A plot of the logarithm of the initial target copy number versus CT gives a straight line
(Fig. 2.12) and has a slope of −1/log E. This graph
has two functions. It permits the calculation of the
initial target copy number from experimental CT
values and determination of the reaction efficiency.
The maximum efficiency possible for a PCR reaction
is two and is achieved if every PCR product is replicated in every cycle. In practice, the efficiency may
be much lower and the reasons for this reduced
efficiency include:

the presence of PCR inhibitors;
the presence of DNA fragments that cause nonspecific priming events;
inappropriate choice of primers, probes, and
amplicons.

For a more detailed discussion of quantitative PCR
the reader should consult www.idahotech.com/
lightcycler_u/lectures/quantification_on_lc.htm
There are a number of different ways of
generating fluorescence in quantitative
PCR reactions
The original work on the development of quantitative PCR made use of the enhanced fluorescence of
ethidium bromide when it intercalates into doublestranded DNA. An alternative to ethidium bromide is
SYBR Green I. This dye binds in the minor groove of
double-stranded DNA and on binding its fluorescence increases over 100-fold. The problem with
both of these dyes is that they bind equally to the
specific product of the amplification reaction and to
any non-specific products and primer dimers as well.
Although there are ways of handling this problem
an alternative is to use specific amplification probes
(Livak et al. 1995).
The most widely used probe system is TaqManTM.
In this system (Holland et al. 1991, Woo et al. 1998),
the probes used are oligonucleotides with a reporter
fluorescent dye attached at the 5′ end and a
quencher dye at the 3′ end. While the probe is intact,

32

CHAPTER 2

Reporter
5’
3’
5’

Forward
primer

R

Quencher
Probe

Q

Reverse
primer
R

5’
3’
5’

Binding of
primers and probe

5’
3’
5’

Polymerization

5’
3’
5’

Strand
displacement

5’
3’
5’

Release of
reporter

5’
3’
5’

Polymerization
complete

Q

5’
3’
5’

R

Q

5’
3’
5’

R

Q

5’
3’
5’

R

Q

5’
3’
5’

the proximity of the quencher reduces the fluorescence emitted by the reporter dye. If the target
sequence is present, the probe anneals downstream
from one of the primer sites. As the primer is
extended, the probe is cleaved by the 5′ nuclease
activity of the Taq polymerase (Fig. 2.13). This cleavage of the probe separates the reporter dye from the
quencher dye, thereby increasing the reporter-dye
signal. Cleavage removes the probe from the target
strand, allowing primer extension to continue to the
end of the template strand. Additional reporter-dye
molecules are cleaved from their respective probes
with each cycle, effecting an increase in fluorescence
intensity proportional to the amount of amplicon
produced.
Instrumentation has been developed which combines thermal cycling with measurement of fluorescence, thereby enabling the progress of the PCR to be

Fig. 2.13 Real-time
quantitative PCR. See
text for details.

monitored in real time. This revolutionizes the way
one approaches PCR-based quantitation of DNA.
Reactions are characterized by the point in time during cycling when amplification of a product is first
detected, rather than by the amount of PCR product
accumulated after a fixed number of cycles. The
higher the starting copy number of the target, the
sooner a significant increase in fluorescence is noted.
Quantitation of the amount of target in unknown
samples is achieved by preparing a standard curve,
using different starting copy numbers of the target
sequence.
Two alternatives to the TaqMan system are molecular beacons (Tyagi & Kramer 1996, Tyagi et al.
1998) and Scorpion probes (Thelwell et al. 2000).
These differ from TaqMan probes in that fluorescence
occurs by hybridization of the probe rather than
cleavage of the probe during amplification. Molecular

33

Basic techniques

Molecular beacon

Hybridization

Target DNA

Fig. 2.14 The principle of molecular beacons. In the
absence of a DNA target the fluorophore (purple) is held close
to the quencher (gray) and fluorescence cannot occur. When
the probe binds to its target, the rigidity of the probe-target
helix forces the stem of the probe to unwind. This results in
sufficient spatial separation of the fluorophore and quencher
for fluorescence to occur.

beacons are hairpin-shaped oligonucleotides with a
fluorophore at one end and a fluorescence quencher
at the other end. While in the hairpin structure the
fluorescence is quenched but when the probe binds
to the target it undergoes a conformational reorganization that restores fluorescence (Fig. 2.14). A
Scorpion probe also has a hairpin loop configuration
but differs from a molecular beacon in that it has
a 3′ complementary sequence that acts as a primer
and is extended in the PCR reaction (Fig. 2.15). After
denaturation, the probe sequence binds to the target
sequence and this restores fluorescence. Scorpions
perform better under rapid cycling conditions because
binding obeys first-order kinetics whereas molecular
beacons obey second-order kinetics.
A major advantage of fluorescent probes is that
they can be constructed using a number of different
fluorophores each of which has a characteristic
color. This means that it is possible to determine the
relative amounts of two targets in a mixture provided that they have the same amplification efficiency
(Fig. 2.16).

Heat to denature
5’

3’

Cool and anneal
primers

Extension phase

5’
5’

Heat to
denature
5’
Cool and detect
fluorescence
5’
3’

Fig. 2.15 The
principle of Scorpion
probes. (Redrawn from
Thelwell et al., 2000)

/

3’

Fluorophore

PCR primers

Quencher

Probe sequence

Amplicons

PCR blocker

Target DNA

34

CHAPTER 2

Random
primer

Fluorescence

3′

Fig. 2.17 Multiple displacement amplification reaction.
DNA synthesis is primed by random hexamers. Exponential
amplification occurs by a “hyperbranching” mechanism.
Unlike PCR, which requires thermal cycling to repeatedly
melt template and anneal primers, the φ29 DNA polymerase
acts at 30°C to concurrently extend primers as it displaces
downstream DNA products.

CT = 15
CT = 18

0

5

10

15

20

5′

Genomic DNA template

25

30

35

Cycle number (CT)

Fig. 2.16 The relative concentrations of two DNA samples
as determined using specific probes labeled with different
fluorescent dyes. The difference in CT values for the two DNA
samples is three and providing that they amplify with the
same efficiency the difference in starting concentration is
approximately a factor of 10.

It is now possible to amplify whole genomes
as well as gene segments
The PCR is a technique that amplifies specific target
sequences but recently it has been extended to
whole-genome amplification (WGA). Unlike traditional PCR, the objective of WGA is to represent the
entire genome with minimal amplification bias. In
the case of the human genome this means the

amplification of three billion bases without the loss
or distortion of particular loci or alleles. To date, five
different methods of WGA have been developed and
the characteristics of each of them are compared in
Table 2.2. Four of them are direct variants of PCR
that generate only products of short length (<1000
nucleotides) and with poor fidelity (Lasken & Egholm
2003). For this reason they have not been widely
adopted. An alternative method of WGA that does
not involve PCR has been developed and is called
multiple displacement amplification (MDA) (Dean
et al. 2002; Hosono et al. 2003). In MDA the template is replicated again and again by a hyperbranching mechanism of strand displacement synthesis
(Fig. 2.17). That is, the polymerase lays down new
copies of the template concurrently with the displacement of new copies. MDA is an isothermal method
that takes advantage of two key properties of the
DNA polymerase from bacteriophage ϕ29. First, this

Table 2.2 Characteristics of commonly used whole genome amplification methods.

Method
DNA yield (per 100 ml reaction)
Reactions scalable to any volume
DNA product length (bp)
Amplification bias range
between loci
DNA polymerase error rate
Amplification from single cells
demonstrated
Amplification of fixed, paraffinembedded tissue

MDA

PEP

iPEP

DOP

LL-DOP-PCR

80 mg
Yes
2000–≥100,000

40 ng
No
100–1000

ND
1–6 mg
ND
No
No
No
100 –1000 100 –1000 500 – > 10,000

<6-fold
<10 −6

103
ND
3 × 10−4 to 1 × 10−5 ∼10−5

106
3 × 10−4

103
−10 −5

ND

+

+

+

ND

–

+

+

+

ND

ND, not determined; MDA, multiple displacement amplification; PEP, primer extension preamplification; iPEP, improved primer
extension preamplification; DOP, degenerate-oligonucleotide-primed PCR; LL-DOP-PCR, long products from low DNA quantities
degenerate-oligonucleotide-primed PCR.

Basic techniques

polymerase adds ~70,000 nucleotides every time it
binds to the primer and explains why MDA generates
long DNA products. Second, it is an extremely highfidelity polymerase with an error rate of only 1 in
106–107.

Suggested reading
Ashton R., Padala C. & Kane R.S. (2003) Microfluidic
separation of DNA. Current Opinion in Biotechnology
14, 497–504.
Barbier V. & Viovy J.L. (2003) Advanced polymers for
DNA separation. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 14,
51–7.
Slater G.W., Kenward M., McCormick L.C. & Gauthier
M.G. (2003) The theory of DNA separation by capillary electrophoresis. Current Opinion in Biotechnology
14, 58–64.
Three reviews from the same journal issue on the growing
trend to separate DNA species by capillary electrophoresis
rather than in slab gels.
Arezi B., Xing W., Sorge J.A. & Hogrefe H.H. (2003)
Amplification efficiency of thermostable DNA polymerases. Analytical Biochemistry 321, 226–35.
Pavlov A.R., Pavlova N.V., Kozyavkin S.A. & Slesarev
A.I. (2004) Recent developments in the optimization
of thermostable DNA polymerases for efficient applications. Trends in Biotechnology 22, 253–60.
Two excellent papers on the factors affecting enzyme selection for use in the PCR.

35

Ding C. & Cantor C.R. (2004) Quantitative analysis of
nucleic acids – the last few years of progress. Journal
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 37, 1–10.
Pardigol A., Guillet S. & Popping B. (2003) A simple
procedure for quantification of genetically modified
organisms using hybrid amplicon standards. European Food Research Technology 216, 412–20.
These two papers discuss different aspects of the problems
associated with quantitative PCR.
Barker D.L., Hansen M.S., Faruqi A.F., et al. (2004) Two
methods of whole-genome amplification enable accurate genotyping across a 2320-SNP linkage panel.
Genome Research 14, 901–7.
Holbrook J.F., Stabley D. & Sol-Church K. (2005)
Exploring whole genome amplification as a DNA
recovery tool for molecular genetic analysis. Journal
of Biomolecular Techniques 16, 125–33.
Paez J.G., Lin M., Beroukhim R., et al. (2004) Genome
coverage and sequence fidelity of the φ29 polymerase-based multiple strand displacement whole
genome amplification. Nucleic Acids Research 32, 71.
These three papers are good examples of the progress
being made in the highly topical subject of whole genome
amplification.

Useful website
http://www.idahotech.com/lightcycler_u/lectures/
This website contains everything you wanted to know
about quantitative PCR but were afraid to ask about.

CHAPTER 3
Cutting and joining DNA molecules

Cutting DNA molecules
Before 1970 there was no method for cleaving DNA
at discrete points. All the available methods for
fragmenting DNA were non-specific. The available
endonucleases had little site specificity and chemical
methods produced very small fragments of DNA. The
only method where any degree of control could be
exercised was the use of mechanical shearing. The
long, thin threads which constitute duplex DNA
molecules are sufficiently rigid to be very easily broken by shear forces in solution. Intense sonication
with ultrasound can reduce the length to about 300
nucleotide pairs. More controlled shearing can be
achieved by high-speed stirring in a blender. Typically,
high-molecular-weight DNA is sheared to a population of molecules with a mean size of about 8 kb by
stirring at 1500 rev/min for 30 min (Wensink et al.
1974). Breakage occurs essentially at random with
respect to DNA sequence. The termini consist of short,
single-stranded regions which may have to be taken
into account in subsequent joining procedures.
During the 1960s, phage biologists elucidated the
biochemical basis of the phenomenon of host restriction and modification. The culmination of this work
was the purification of the restriction endonuclease
of Escherichia coli K12 by Meselson and Yuan (1968).
Since this endonuclease cuts unmodified DNA into
large discrete fragments, it was reasoned that it must
recognize a target sequence. This in turn raised the
prospect of controlled manipulation of DNA. Unfortunately, the K12 endonuclease turned out to be
perverse in its properties. While the enzyme does
bind to a defined recognition sequence, cleavage
occurs at a “random” site several kilobases away
(Yuan et al. 1980). The much sought-after breakthrough finally came in 1970 with the discovery in
Hemophilus influenzae (Kelly & Smith 1970, Smith
& Wilcox 1970) of an enzyme that behaves more
simply. That is, the enzyme recognizes a particular
target sequence in a duplex DNA molecule and
breaks the polynucleotide chain within that sequence

to give rise to discrete fragments of defined length
and sequence.
The presence of restriction and modification
systems is a double-edged sword. On the one hand,
they provide a rich source of useful enzymes for
DNA manipulation. On the other, these systems can
significantly affect the recovery of recombinant DNA
in cloning hosts. For this reason, some knowledge of
restriction and modification is essential.
Understanding the biological basis of hostcontrolled restriction and modification of
bacteriophage DNA led to the identification
of restriction endonucleases
Restriction systems allow bacteria to monitor the
origin of incoming DNA and to destroy it if it is
recognized as foreign. Restriction endonucleases
recognize specific sequences in the incoming DNA
and cleave the DNA into fragments, either at specific
sites or more randomly. When the incoming DNA is
a bacteriophage genome, the effect is to reduce the
efficiency of plating, i.e. to reduce the number of
plaques formed in plating tests. The phenomena
of restriction and modification were well illustrated
and studied by the behavior of phage λ on two E. coli
host strains.
If a stock preparation of phage λ, for example, is
made by growth upon E. coli strain C and this stock
is then titered upon E. coli C and E. coli K, the titers
observed on these two strains will differ by several
orders of magnitude, the titer on E. coli K being the
lower. The phage are said to be restricted by the second host strain (E. coli K). When those phage that do
result from the infection of E. coli K are now replated
on E. coli K they are no longer restricted; but if they
are first cycled through E. coli C they are once again
restricted when plated upon E. coli K (Fig. 3.1). Thus
the efficiency with which phage λ plates upon a particular host strain depends upon the strain on which
it was last propagated. This non-heritable change
conferred upon the phage by the second host strain

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

E. coli K

EOP = 10–4
EOP = 1

EOP = 1

λ.K

EOP = 1

λ.C
E. coli C

Fig. 3.1 Host-controlled restriction and modification of
phage λ in E. coli strain K, analyzed by efficiency of plating
(EOP). Phage propagated by growth on strains K or C (i.e. λ.K
or λ.C) have EOPs on the two strains, as indicated by arrows.

(E. coli K) that allows it to be replated on that strain
without further restriction is called modification.
The restricted phages adsorb to restrictive hosts
and inject their DNA normally. When the phage
are labeled with 32P, it is apparent that their DNA is
degraded soon after injection (Dussoix & Arber 1962)
and the endonuclease that is primarily responsible
for this degradation is called a restriction endonuclease
or restriction enzyme (Lederberg & Meselson 1964).
The restrictive host must, of course, protect its own
DNA from the potentially lethal effects of the restriction endonuclease and so its DNA must be appropriately modified. Modification involves methylation
of certain bases at a very limited number of sequences
within DNA, which constitute the recognition
sequences for the restriction endonuclease. This

explains why phage that survive one cycle of growth
upon the restrictive host can subsequently reinfect
that host efficiently; their DNA has been replicated in
the presence of the modifying methylase and so it,
like the host DNA, becomes methylated and protected from the restriction system. Although phage
infection has been chosen as our example to illustrate restriction and modification, these processes
can occur whenever DNA is transferred from one
bacterial strain to another.
Four different types of restriction and
modification (R-M) system have been
recognized but only one is widely used in
gene manipulation
At least four different kinds of R-M system are known:
type I, type II, type III, and type IIs. The essential differences between them are summarized in Table 3.1.
The type I systems were the first to be characterized and a typical example is that from E. coli
K12. The active enzyme consists of two restriction
subunits, two modification (methylation) subunits,
and one recognition subunit. These subunits are
the products of the hsdR, hsdM, and hsdS genes.
The methylation and cutting reactions both require
ATP and S-adenosylmethionine as cofactors. The
recognition sequences are quite long with no recognizable features such as symmetry. The enzyme cuts
unmodified DNA at some distance from the recognition sequence. However, because the methylation
reaction is performed by the same enzyme which
mediates cleavage, the target DNA may be modified
before it is cut. These features mean that type I
systems are of little value for gene manipulation
(see also Box 3.1). However, their presence in E. coli

Table 3.1 Characteristics of the different types of endonucleases.

System

37

Key features

Type I

One enzyme with different subunits for recognition, cleavage, and methylation. Recognizes and
methylates a single sequence but cleaves DNA up to 1000 bp away

Type II

Two different enzymes which both recognize the same target sequence, which is symmetrical.
The two enzymes either cleave or modify the recognition sequence

Type III

One enzyme with two different subunits, one for recognition and modification and one for
cleavage. Recognizes and methylates same sequence but cleaves 24–26 bp away

Type IIs

Two different enzymes but recognition sequence is asymmetric. Cleavage occurs on one side of
recognition sequence up to 20 bp away

38

CHAPTER 3

Box 3.1 Restriction: from a phenomenon in
bacterial genetics to a biological revolution
In the two related phenomena of hostcontrolled restriction and modification, a
single cycle of phage growth in a particular
host bacterium, alters the host range of the
progeny virus. The virus may fail to plate
efficiently on a second host; its host range is
restricted. This modification of the virus differs
fundamentally from mutation because it is
imposed by the host cell on which the virus
has been grown but it is not inherited; when
the phage is grown in some other host, the
modification may be lost. In the 1950s,
restriction and modification were recognized
as common phenomena, affecting many
virulent and temperate (i.e. capable of
forming lysogens) phages and involving
various bacterial species (Luria 1953,
Lederberg 1957).
Arber and Dussoix clarified the molecular
basis of the phenomena. They showed that
restriction of phage l is associated with
rapid breakdown of the phage DNA in the
host bacterium. They also showed that
modification results from an alteration of the
phage DNA which renders the DNA insensitive
to restriction. They deduced that a single
modified strand in the DNA duplex is sufficient
to prevent restriction (Arber & Dussoix 1962,
Dussoix & Arber 1962). Subsequent
experiments implicated methylation of
the DNA in the modification process
(Arber 1965).
Detailed genetic analysis, in the 1960s, of
the bacterial genes (in E. coli K and E. coli B)
responsible for restriction and modification
supported the duality of the two phenomena.
Mutants of the bacteria could be isolated
that were both restriction-deficient and
modification-deficient (R−M−), or that were
R−M+. The failure to recover R+M− mutants
was correctly ascribed to the suicidal failure
to confer protective modification upon the
host’s own DNA.

The biochemistry of restriction advanced
with the isolation of the restriction
endonuclease from E. coli K (Meselson
& Yuan 1968). It was evident that the
restriction endonucleases from E. coli K
and E. coli B were important examples of
proteins that recognize specific structures
in DNA, but the properties of these type I
enzymes as they are now known, were
complex. Although the recognition sites in
the phage could be mapped genetically
(Murray et al. 1973a), determined efforts
to define the DNA sequences cleaved were
unsuccessful (Eskin & Linn 1972, Murray
et al. 1973b).
The breakthrough came with Hamilton
Smith’s discovery of a restriction endonuclease
from Hemophilus influenzae strain Rd (Smith
& Wilcox 1970) and the elucidation of the
nucleotide sequence at its cleavage sites in
phage T7 DNA (Kelly & Smith 1970). This
enzyme is now known as HindII. The choice
of T7 DNA as the substrate for cleavage was
a good one, because the bacterium also
contains another type II restriction enzyme,
HindIII, in abundance. Fortunately, HindIII
does not cleave T7 DNA, and so any
contaminating HindIII in the HindII
preparation could not be problematical
(Old et al. 1975). Shortly after the discovery
of HindII, several other type II restriction
endonucleases were isolated and
characterized. EcoRI was foremost among
these (Hedgepeth et al. 1972). They were
rapidly exploited in the first recombinant
DNA experiments.
By the mid-1960s, restriction and
modification had been recognized as
important and interesting phenomena
within the field of bacterial genetics (see, for
example, Hayes 1968), but who could have
foreseen the astonishing impact of restriction
enzymes upon biology?

39

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

strains can affect recovery of recombinants (see
p. 24). Type III enzymes have symmetrical recognition sequences but otherwise resemble type I systems
and are of little value.
Most of the useful R-M systems are of type II. They
have a number of advantages over type I and III
systems. First, restriction and modification are mediated by separate enzymes so it is possible to cleave
DNA in the absence of modification. Secondly, the
restriction activities do not require cofactors such as
ATP or S-adenosylmethionine, making them easier to
use. Most important of all, type II enzymes recognize
a defined, usually symmetrical, sequence and cut within
it. Many of them also make a staggered break in the
DNA and the usefulness of this will become apparent. Although type IIs systems have similar cofactors
and macromolecular structure to those of type II systems, the fact that restriction occurs at a distance
from the recognition site limits their usefulness.
The classification of R-M systems into types I to
III is convenient but may require modification as
new discoveries are made. For example, the Eco571
system comprises a single polypeptide which has
both restriction and modification activities (Petrusyte
et al. 1988). Other restriction systems are known which
fall outside the above classification. Examples include
the mcr and mrr systems (see p. 43) and homing
endonucleases. The latter are double-stranded
deoxyribonucleases (DNases) derived from introns
or inteins (Belfort & Roberts 1997). They have large,
asymmetric recognition sequences and, unlike standard restriction endonucleases, tolerate some sequence
degeneracy within their recognition sequence.
The naming of restriction endonucleases
provides information about their source

Smith and Nathans (1973) and a simplified version
of this is in use today. The key features are:
•

•
•

The species name of the host organism is identified by the first letter of the genus name and the
first two letters of the specific epithet to generate
a three-letter abbreviation. This abbreviation is
always written in italics.
Where a particular strain has been the source
then this is identified.
When a particular host strain has several different R-M systems, these are identified by roman
numerals.

Some examples are given in Table 3.2.
Homing endonucleases are named in a similar
fashion except that intron-encoded endonucleases
are given the prefix “I-” (e.g. I-CeuI) and intein
endonucleases have the prefix “PI-” (e.g. Pl-PspI).
Where it is necessary to distinguish between the
restriction and methylating activities, they are given
the prefixes “R” and “M”, respectively, e.g. R.SmaI
and M.SmaI.
Restriction enzymes cut DNA at sites of
rotational symmetry and different enzymes
recognize different sequences
Most, but not all, type II restriction endonucleases
recognize and cleave DNA within particular sequences
of four to eight nucleotides which have a twofold axis
of rotational symmetry. Such sequences are often
referred to as palindromes because of their similarity
to words that read the same backwards as forwards.
For example, the restriction and modification enzymes
R.EcoRI and M.EcoRI recognize the sequence:

The discovery of a large number of restriction and
modification systems called for a uniform system of
nomenclature. A suitable system was proposed by

5′-G A A T T C-3′
3′-C T T A A G-5′
Axis of symmetry

Table 3.2 Examples of restriction endonuclease nomenclature.

Enzyme
SmaI
HaeIII
HindII
HindIII
BamHI

Enzyme source

Recognition sequence

Serratia marcescens, 1st enzyme
Hemophilus aegyptius, 3rd enzyme
Hemophilus influenzae, strain d, 2nd enzyme
Hemophilus influenzae, strain d, 3rd enzyme
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, strain H, 1st enzyme

CCCGGG
GGCC
GTPyPuAC
AAGCTT
GGATCC

40

CHAPTER 3

The position at which the restricting enzyme cuts is
usually shown by the symbol “/” and the nucleotides
methylated by the modification enzyme are usually
marked with an asterisk. For EcoRI these would be
represented thus:
5′-G/AA*T T C-3′
3′-C T T A*A/G-5′
For convenience it is usual practice to simplify the
description of recognition sequences by showing
only one strand of DNA, that which runs in the 5′ to
3′ direction. Thus the EcoRI recognition sequence
would be shown as G/AATTC.
From the information shown above we can see
that EcoRI makes single-stranded breaks four bases
apart in the opposite strands of its target sequence so
generating fragments with protruding 5′ termini:
5′-G
5′-AATTC-3′
3′-CTTAA-5′
G-5′
These DNA fragments can associate by hydrogen
bonding between overlapping 5′ termini, or the fragments can circularize by intramolecular reaction
(Fig. 3.2). For this reason the fragments are said to
have sticky or cohesive ends. In principle, DNA fragments from diverse sources can be joined by means of
the cohesive ends and, as we shall see later, the nicks
in the molecules can be sealed to form an intact
artificially recombinant DNA molecule.
Not all type II enzymes cleave their target sites like
EcoRI. Some, such as PstI (CTGCA/G), produce fragments bearing 3′ overhangs, while others, such as
SmaI (CCC/GGG), produce blunt or flush ends.

Intermolecular association

5‘

Intramolecular association

AATT
TTAA
5‘

5‘

5‘

TTAA

AATT
AATT

AATT

AA
T TA T
T
A

AATT
TTAA

5‘

Base pairing

5‘

Base pairing

5‘

AATT

TTAA

5‘

Fig. 3.2 Cohesive ends of DNA fragments produced by
digestion with EcoRI.

Table 3.3 Some restriction endonucleases and their
recognition sites.

Enzyme

Recognition sequence

4-base cutters
MboI, DpnI, Sau3AI
MspI, HpaII
AluI
HaeIII
TaiI

/GATC
C/CGG
AG/CT
GG/CC
ACGT/

6-base cutters
Bgl II
ClaI
Pvu II
PvuI
KpnI

A/GATCT
AT/CGAT
CAG/CTG
CGAT/CG
GGTAC/C

8-base cutters
NotI
Sbf I

GC/GGCCGC
CCTGCA/GG

To date, over 10,000 microbes from around the
world have been screened for restriction enzymes.
From these, over 3000 enzymes have been found
representing approximately 200 different sequence
specificities. Some representative examples are shown
in Table 3.3. For a comprehensive database of information on restriction endonucleases and their
associated methylases, including cleavage sites, commercial availability, and literature references, the
reader should consult the website maintained by
New England Biolabs (www.rebase.neb.com).
Occasionally enzymes with novel DNA sequence
specificities are found but most prove to have the
same specificity as enzymes already known. Restriction enzymes with the same sequence specificity and
cut site are known as isoschizomers. Enzymes that
recognize the same sequence but cleave at different points, for example SmaI (CCC/GGG) and XmaI
(C/CCGGG), are sometimes known as neoschizomers.
Under extreme conditions, such as elevated pH or
low ionic strength, restriction endonucleases are
capable of cleaving sequences which are similar but
not identical to their defined recognition sequence.
This altered specificity is known as star activity. The
most common types of altered activity are acceptance
of base substitutions and truncation of the number
of bases in the recognition sequence. For example,
EcoRI* (EcoRI star activity) cleaves the sequence
N/AATTN, where N is any base, whereas EcoRI
cleaves the sequence GAATTC.

41

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

+ C content of a DNA molecule affects
The G+
its susceptibility to different restriction
endonucleases

two of the four recognition sites on plasmid pBR322
DNA but will seldom cleave the remaining two sites.

The number and size of the fragments generated
by a restriction enzyme depend on the frequency of
occurrence of the target site in the DNA to be cut.
Assuming a DNA molecule with a 50% G+C content
and a random distribution of the four bases, a fourbase recognition site occurs every 44 (256) bp.
Similarly, a six-base recognition site occurs every 46
(4096) bp and an eight-base recognition sequence
every 48 (65,536) bp. In practice, there is not a
random distribution of the four bases and many
organisms can be AT- or GC-rich, e.g. the nuclear
genome of mammals is 40% G+C and the dinucleotide CG is fivefold less common than statistically
expected. Similarly, CCG and CGG are the rarest
trinucleotides in most A+T-rich bacterial genomes
and CTAG is the rarest tetranucleotide in G+C-rich
bacterial genomes. Thus different restriction endonucleases with six-base recognition sites can produce
average fragment sizes significantly different from
the expected 4096 bp (Table 3.4).
Certain restriction endonucleases show preferential cleavage of some sites in the same DNA molecule.
For example, phage λ DNA has five sites for EcoRI but
the different sites are cleaved non-randomly (Thomas
& Davis 1975). The site nearest the right terminus is
cleaved 10 times faster than the sites in the middle of
the molecule. There are four sites for SacII in λ DNA
but the three sites in the center of the molecule are
cleaved 50 times faster than the remaining site.
There is a group of three restriction enzymes which
show an even more dramatic site preference. These
are NarI, NaeI, and SacII and they require simultaneous interaction with two copies of their recognition
sequence before they will cleave DNA (Kruger 1988,
Conrad & Topal, 1989). Thus NarI will rapidly cleave

Simple DNA manipulations can convert a site
for one restriction enzyme into a site for
another enzyme
In order to join two fragments of DNA together, it is
not essential that they are produced by the same
restriction endonuclease. Many different restriction
endonucleases produce compatible cohesive ends.
For example, AgeI (A/CCGGT) and AvaI (C/CCGGG)
produce molecules with identical 5′ overhangs and
so can be ligated together. There are many other
examples of compatible cohesive ends. What is more,
if the cohesive ends were produced by six-base cutters, the ligation products are often recleavable by
four-base cutters. Thus, in the example cited above,
the hybrid site ACCGGG can be cleaved by HpaII
(C/CGG), NciI (CC/GGG), or ScrFI (CC/NGG).
New restriction sites can be generated by filling in
the overhangs generated by restriction endonucleases and ligating the products together. Figure 3.3
shows that after filling in the cohesive ends produced
by EcoRI, ligation produces restriction sites recognized by four other enzymes. Many other examples
of creating new target sites by filling and ligation are
known.
There are also many examples of combinations of
blunt-end restriction endonucleases that produce
recleavable ligation products. For example, when
molecules generated by cleavage with AluI (AG/CT)
are joined to ones produced by EcoRV (GAT/ATC),
some of the ligation sites will have the sequence
GATCT and others will have the sequence AGATC.
Both can be cleaved by MboI (GATC).
A methyltransferase, M.SssI, that methylates the
dinucleotide CpG (Nur et al. 1985) has been isolated
from Spiroplasma. This enzyme can be used to modify

Table 3.4 Average fragment size (bp) produced by different enzymes with DNA from different sources.

Enzyme
ApaI
AvrII
BamHI
DraI
SpeI

Target

Arabidopsis

Nematode

Drosophila

E. coli

Human

GGGCCC
CCTAGG
GGATCC
TTTAAA
ACTAGT

25,000
15,000
6,000
2,000
8,000

40,000
20,000
9,000
1,000
8,000

6,000
20,000
4,000
1,000
9,000

15,000
150,000
5,000
2,000
60,000

2,000
8,000
5,000
2,000
10,000

42

CHAPTER 3

GAATTC
CTTAAG
EcoRI
AATTC

G
CTTAA

G

DNA polymerase
GAATT

AATTC

CTTAA

TTAAG

DNA ligase
GAATTAATTC
CTTAATTAAG

XmnI

AseI or
MseI
Tsp509I

GAATT AATTC

GAAT

CTTAA TTAAG

CTTAAT
G

AATTC

CTTAA
G
(Identical to EcoRI cleavage)

Recognition Sequences
AseI AT/TAAT Tsp509I

/AATT

MseI T/TAA

GAANN/NNTTC

XmnI

in vitro restriction endonuclease target sites which
contain the CG sequence. Some of the target
sequences modified in this way will be resistant to
endonuclease cleavage, while others will remain
sensitive. For example, if the sequence CCGG is
modified with SssI, it will be resistant to HpaII but
sensitive to MspI. Since 90% of the methyl groups in
the genomic DNA of many animals, including vertebrates and echinoderms, occur as 5-methylcytosine
in the sequence CG, M.Sss can be used to imprint
DNA from other sources with a vertebrate pattern.
Methylation can reduce the susceptibility of
DNA to cleavage by restriction endonucleases
and the efficiency of DNA transformation
Most laboratory strains of E. coli contain three sitespecific DNA methylases. The methylase encoded
by the dam gene transfers a methyl group from Sadenosylmethionine to the N6 position of the adenine

TAATTC
TAAG

Fig. 3.3 The
generation of three
new restriction sites
after filling in the
overhangs produced
by endonuclease
EcoRI and ligating
the products together.
Note that there are
two target sites,
4 bp apart, in the
reconstituted molecule
for endonuclease
Tsp509I.

residue in the sequence GATC. The methylase encoded
by the dcm gene (the Dcm methylase, previously
called the Mec methylase) modifies the internal cytosine residues in the sequences CCAGG and CCTGG at
the C5 position (Marinus et al. 1983). In DNA in
which the GC content is 50%, the sites for these two
methylases occur, on average, every 256–512 bp.
The third methylase is the enzyme M.EcoKI but the
sites for this enzyme are much rarer and occur about
once every 8 kb.
These enzymes are of interest for two reasons.
First, some or all of the sites for a restriction endonuclease may be resistant to cleavage when isolated
from strains expressing the Dcm or Dam methylases.
This occurs when a particular base in the recognition site of a restriction endonuclease is methylated.
The relevant base may be methylated by one of
the E. coli methylases if the methylase recognition
site overlaps the endonuclease recognition site. For
example, DNA isolated from Dam+ E. coli is completely

43

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

resistant to cleavage by MboI, but not Sau3AI, both
of which recognize the sequence GATC. Similarly,
DNA from a Dcm+ strain will be cleaved by BstNI
but not by EcoRII, even though both recognize the
sequence CCATGG. It is worth noting that most
cloning strains of E. coli are Dam+ Dcm+ but double
mutants are available (Marinus et al. 1983).
The second reason these methylases are of interest
is that the modification state of plasmid DNA can
affect the frequency of transformation in special
situations. Transformation efficiency will be reduced
when Dam-modified plasmid DNA is introduced into
Dam− E. coli or Dam- or Dcm-modified DNA is introduced into other species (Russell & Zinder 1987).
When DNA is to be moved from E. coli to another
species it is best to use a strain lacking the Dam and
Dcm methylases.
As will be seen later, it is difficult to clone DNA that
contains short, direct repetitive sequences stably.
Deletion of the repeat units occurs quickly, even
when the host strain is deficient in recombination.
However, the deletion mechanism appears to involve
Dam methylation, for it does not occur in dam
mutants (Troester et al. 2000).
It is important to eliminate restriction
systems in E. coli strains used as hosts for
recombinant DNA
If foreign DNA is introduced into an E. coli host it
may be attacked by restriction systems active in the
host cell. An important feature of these systems is
that the fate of the incoming DNA in the restrictive
host depends not only on the sequence of the DNA
but also upon its history: the DNA sequence may or
may not be restricted, depending upon its source
immediately prior to transforming the E. coli host
strain. As we have seen, post-replication modifications of the DNA, usually in the form of methylation
of particular adenine or cytosine residues in the
target sequence, protect against cognate restriction
systems but not, in general, against different restriction systems.
Because restriction provides a natural defense
against invasion by foreign DNA, it is usual to employ
a K restriction-deficient E. coli K12 strain as a host
in transformation with newly created recombinant
molecules. Thus where, for example, mammalian
DNA has been ligated into a plasmid vector, transformation of the EcoK restriction-deficient host eliminates the possibility that the incoming sequence
will be restricted, even if the mammalian sequence

mcrC mcrB

hsdS hsdM

hsdR

mrr

14 kb

Fig. 3.4
K12.

The immigration control region of E. coli strain

contains an unmodified EcoK target site. If the host
happens to be EcoK restriction-deficient but EcoK
modification-proficient, propagation on the host will
confer modification methylation and hence allow
subsequent propagation of the recombinant in EcoK
restriction-proficient strains, if desired.
Whereas the EcoKI restriction system, encoded by
the hsdRMS genes, cleaves DNA that is not protected
by methylation at the target site, the McrA, McrBC,
and Mrr endonucleases cut DNA that is methylated
at specific positions. All three endonucleases restrict
DNA modified by CpC methylase (M.SssI) and the
Mrr endonuclease will attack DNA with methyladenine in specific sequences. The significance of these
restriction enzymes is that DNA from many bacteria,
and from all plants and higher animals, is extensively
methylated and its recovery in cloning experiments
will be greatly reduced if the restriction activity is
not eliminated. There is no problem with DNA from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae or Drosophila melanogaster
since there is little methylation of their DNA.
All the restriction systems in E. coli are clustered
together in an “immigration control region” about
14 kb in length (Fig. 3.4). Some strains carry mutations in one of the genes. For example, strains DH1
and DH5 have a mutation in the hsdR gene and so
are defective for the EcoKI endonuclease but still
mediate the EcoKI modification of DNA. Strain DP50
has a mutation in the hsdS gene and so lacks both the
EcoKI restriction and modification activities. Other
strains, such as E. coli C and the widely used cloning
strain HB101, have a deletion of the entire mcrC–mrr
region and hence lack all restriction activities.
The success of a cloning experiment is
critically dependent on the quality of any
restriction enzymes that are used
Restriction enzymes are available from many different commercial sources. In choosing a source of
enzyme, it is important to consider the quality of the
enzyme supplied. High-quality enzymes are purified
extensively to remove contaminating exonucleases
and endonucleases and tests for the absence of such
contaminants form part of routine quality control

44

CHAPTER 3

(QC) on the finished product (see below). The absence
of exonucleases is particularly important. If they
are present, they can nibble away the overhangs of
cohesive ends, thereby eliminating or reducing the
production of subsequent recombinants. Contaminating phosphatases can remove the terminal phosphate residues, thereby preventing ligation. Even
where subsequent ligation is achieved, the resulting
product may contain small deletions. The message is
clear: cheap restriction enzymes are in reality poor
value for money!
A typical QC procedure is as follows. DNA fragments are produced by an excessive overdigestion of
substrate DNA with each restriction endonuclease.
These fragments are then ligated and recut with the
same restriction endonuclease. Ligation can occur
only if the 3′ and 5′ termini are left intact, and only
those molecules with a perfectly restored recognition
site can be recleaved. A normal banding pattern after
cleavage indicates that both the 3′ and 5′ termini are
intact and the enzyme preparation is free of detectable exonucleases and phosphatases (Fig. 3.5).

An additional QC test is the blue/white screening
assay. In this, the starting material is a plasmid carrying the E. coli lacZ′ gene in which there is a single
recognition site for the enzyme under test. The plasmid is overdigested with the restriction enzyme,
religated and transformed into a lacZ− strain of
E. coli. The transformants are plated on media containing the β-galactosidase substrate Xgal. If the lacZ
gene remains intact after digestion and ligation, it
will give rise to a blue colony. If any degradation of
the cut ends occurred, then a white colony will be
produced (Box 3.2).

Joining DNA molecules
Having described the methods available for cutting
DNA molecules, we must consider the ways in which
DNA fragments can be joined to create artificially
recombinant molecules. There are currently three
methods for joining DNA fragments in vitro. The first
of these capitalizes on the ability of DNA ligase to join
covalently the annealed cohesive ends produced by
certain restriction enzymes. The second depends upon
the ability of DNA ligase from phage T4-infected E. coli
to catalyze the formation of phosphodiester bonds
between blunt-ended fragments. The third utilizes
the enzyme terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase to
synthesize homopolymeric 3′ single-stranded tails at
the ends of fragments. We can now look at these
three methods a little more deeply.
The enzyme DNA ligase is the key to joining
DNA molecules in vitro

Fig. 3.5 Quality control of the enzyme PstI. DNA was
overdigested with the endonuclease and the fragments were
ligated together and then recut. Note that the two digests
give an identical banding pattern upon agarose gel
electrophoresis.

E. coli and phage T4 encode an enzyme, DNA ligase,
which seals single-stranded nicks between adjacent
nucleotides in a duplex DNA chain (Olivera et al. 1968,
Gumport & Lehman 1971). Although the reactions
catalyzed by the enzymes of E. coli and T4-infected E.
coli are very similar, they differ in their cofactor requirements. The T4 enzyme requires ATP, while the
E. coli enzyme requires NAD+. In each case the cofactor is split and forms an enzyme–AMP complex. The
complex binds to the nick, which must expose a 5′
phosphate and 3′ OH group, and makes a covalent
bond in the phosphodiester chain, as shown in Fig. 3.6.
When termini created by a restriction endonuclease that creates cohesive ends associate, the joint has
nicks a few base pairs apart in opposite strands. DNA
ligase can then repair these nicks to form an intact
duplex. This reaction, performed in vitro with purified

45

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

Box 3.2

a-Complementation of b-galactosidase and the use of Xgal

The activity of the enzyme b-galactosidase is
easily monitored by including in the growth
medium the chromogenic substrate 5-bromo4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-D-galactoside (Xgal).
This compound is colorless but on cleavage
releases a blue indolyl derivative. On solid
medium, colonies that are expressing active

b-galactosidase are blue in color while those
without the activity are white in color. This is
often referred to as blue/white screening.
Since Xgal is not an inducer of b-galactosidase,
the non-substrate (gratuitous) inducer
isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG) is
also added to the medium.

CH2OH
O

HO

O

Cl
5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indolylβ-D-galactoside (Xgal)

Br
OH
H

N
H

OH

β-Galactosidase

Cl

Cl

OH

Br

O

O

Cl

Br

Br

Air
N
H
5-Bromo-4-chloroindoxyl

The phenomenon of a-complementation
of b-galactosidase is widely used in molecular
genetics. The starting-point for acomplementation is the M15 mutant of
E. coli. This has a deletion of residues 11–41 in
the lacZ gene and shows no b-galactosidase
activity. Enzyme activity can be restored to the
mutant enzyme in vitro by adding a cyanogen
bromide peptide derived from amino acid
residues 3–92 (Langley et al. 1975, Langley
& Zabin 1976). Complementation can also
be shown in vivo. If a plasmid carrying the
N-terminal fragment of the lacZ gene
encompassing the missing region is
introduced into the M15 mutant, then
b-galactosidase is produced, as demonstrated
by the production of a blue color on medium

DNA ligase, is fundamental to many gene-manipulation procedures, such as that shown in Fig. 3.7.
The optimum temperature for ligation of nicked
DNA is 37°C, but at this temperature the hydrogen-

N
H

N
H

5,5‘-Dibromo-4,4‘-dichloroindigo

containing Xgal. In practice, the plasmid
usually carries the lacI gene and the first 146
codons of the lacZ gene, because in the early
days of genetic engineering this was a
convenient fragment of DNA to manipulate.
Since wild-type b-galactosidase has 1021
amino acids, it is encoded by a gene 3.1 kb
in length. While a gene of this length is easily
manipulated in vitro, there are practical
disadvantages to using the whole gene.
As will be seen later, it is preferable to
keep cloning vectors and their inserts as
small as possible. The phenomenon of
a-complementation allows genetic engineers
to take advantage of the lac system without
having to have the entire Z gene on the
vector.

bonded join between the sticky ends is unstable. EcoRIgenerated termini associate through only four AT
base pairs and these are not sufficient to resist thermal
disruption at such a high temperature. The optimum

46

CHAPTER 3

P

5’
B
B

B
B

B
B
P

P

3’

P
OH

P

P
B
B

P

P

P

B
B
P

B
B

3’
ATP

B
B

P

P

T4 DNA ligase

PPi
5’
Enzyme–AMP

A

Enzyme

P
P

5’
B
B

P
B
B
P

P

3’

B
B

E.coli DNA ligase

NMN

P
OH

P
B
B

P

P
B
B

P

+

P
B
B

P

NAD

3’
B
B

P

5’

Fig. 3.6 Action
of DNA ligase. An
enzyme–AMP complex
binds to a nick bearing
3′ OH and 5′ P groups.
The AMP reacts with
the phosphate group.
Attack by the 3′ OH
group on this moiety
generates a new
phosphodiester bond,
which seals the nick.

AMP
P

5’

B
B

B
B
3’

P

P

P
B
B
P

P
B
B

P

P
B
B

P

P
B
B

P

3’
B
B

P

5’

Origin of
replication

Cleavage site
Plasmid
vector

Tc
resistance

Foreign DNA
Cleavage
site
Restriction
endonuclease

Restriction
endonuclease

AATT

AATT
TTA
A

TTAA

TTAA

A
A
TT
Annealing

AA
T
TT
T
A
A
TT
AA
A
A
TT
Recombinant
plasmid

Recombinant
plasmid

Chromosome

DNA ligase
seals nicks
Transformed bacterial cell

Transformation, Tc selection

Fig. 3.7 Use of
DNA ligase to create
a covalent DNA
recombinant joined
through association of
termini generated by
EcoRI.

47

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

P
OH
P

Ligase

OH
+ dimers, etc.

2Pi

Alkaline
phosphatase

OH OH

Ligase

OHOH

HO
P

P
HO

No reaction

Ligase

Foreign DNA
fragment
Nick

Fig. 3.8 Application
of alkaline phosphatase
treatment to prevent
recircularization of
vector plasmid without
insertion of foreign
DNA.

temperature for ligating the cohesive termini is
therefore a compromise between the rate of enzyme
action and association of the termini, and has been
found experimentally to be in the range 4–15°C
(Dugaiczyk et al. 1975, Ferretti & Sgaramella 1981).
The ligation reaction can be performed so as to
favor the formation of recombinants. First, the population of recombinants can be increased by performing the reaction at a high DNA concentration; in
dilute solutions circularization of linear fragments is
relatively favored because of the reduced frequency
of intermolecular reactions. Secondly, by treating
linearized plasmid vector DNA with alkaline phosphatase to remove 5′-terminal phosphate groups,
both recircularization and plasmid dimer formation
are prevented (Fig. 3.8). In this case, circularization
of the vector can occur only by insertion of nonphosphatase-treated foreign DNA which provides
one 5′-terminal phosphate at each join. One nick at
each join remains unligated, but, after transformation of host bacteria, cellular repair mechanisms
reconstitute the intact duplex.
Joining DNA fragments with cohesive ends by

Transformation

Nick
Host repairs one nick at each
join

DNA ligase is a relatively efficient process which has
been used extensively to create artificial recombinants. A modification of this procedure depends upon
the ability of T4 DNA ligase to join blunt-ended DNA
molecules (Sgaramella 1972). The E. coli DNA ligase
will not catalyze blunt ligation except under special
reaction conditions of macromolecular crowding
(Zimmerman & Pheiffer 1983). Blunt ligation is most
usefully applied to joining blunt-ended fragments via
linker molecules; in an early example of this, Scheller
et al. (1977) synthesized self-complementary decameric oligonucleotides, which contain sites for one or
more restriction endonucleases. One such molecule
is shown in Fig. 3.9. The molecule can be ligated to
both ends of the foreign DNA to be cloned, and then
treated with restriction endonuclease to produce a
sticky-ended fragment, which can be incorporated
into a vector molecule that has been cut with the
same restriction endonuclease. Insertion by means
of the linker creates restriction-enzyme target sites at
each end of the foreign DNA and so enables the foreign DNA to be excised and recovered after cloning
and amplification in the host bacterium.

48

CHAPTER 3

Adaptors and linkers are short doublestranded DNA molecules that permit different
cleavage sites to be interconnected

EcoRI
Decameric
linker
molecule

C C G A A T T C G G 3’
G G C T T A A G C C 5’

T4 DNA
ligase

+

Foreign
DNA

Linker
molecules
EcoRI

DNA
ligase

Vector

Fig. 3.9 A decameric linker molecule containing an EcoRI
target site is joined by T4 DNA ligase to both ends of flushended foreign DNA. Cohesive ends are then generated by
EcoRI. This DNA can then be incorporated into a vector that
has been treated with the same restriction endonuclease.

It may be the case that the restriction enzyme used to
generate the cohesive ends in the linker will also cut
the foreign DNA at internal sites. In this situation,
the foreign DNA will be cloned as two or more subfragments. One solution to this problem is to choose
another restriction enzyme, but there may not be a
suitable choice if the foreign DNA is large and has
sites for several restriction enzymes. Another solution is to methylate internal restriction sites with the
appropriate modification methylase. An example of
this is described in Fig. 6.2 (p. 99). Alternatively, a
general solution to the problem is provided by chemically synthesized adaptor molecules which have a
preformed cohesive end (Wu et al. 1978). Consider a
blunt-ended foreign DNA containing an internal
BamHI site (Fig. 3.10), which is to be cloned in a
BamHI-cut vector. The BamHI adaptor molecule has
one blunt end bearing a 5′ phosphate group and a
BamHI cohesive end which is not phosphorylated.
The adaptor can be ligated to the foreign DNA ends.
The foreign DNA plus added adaptors is then phosphorylated at the 5′ termini and ligated into the
BamHI site of the vector. If the foreign DNA were to
be recovered from the recombinant with BamHI, it
would be obtained in two fragments. However, the
adaptor is designed to contain two other restriction
sites (SmaI, HpaII), which may enable the foreign
DNA to be recovered intact.

5’–HO–GATCCCCGGG–OH
3’–
HO–GGGCCC–P
Adaptor molecule
P
HO

HO
HO

OH
+
P
HO
HO

OH
P
OH
P

T4 DNA
ligase, ATP
HO
HO

OH
OH

Polynucleotide
kinase, ATP
OH
P
Vector
OH P

P
HO

OH
P

Fig. 3.10 Use of a
BamHI adaptor
molecule. A synthetic
adaptor molecule is
ligated to the foreign
DNA. The adaptor is
used in the 5′-hydroxyl
form to prevent selfpolymerization. The
foreign DNA plus
ligated adaptors is
phosphorylated at the
5′-termini and ligated
into the vector
previously cut with
BamHI.

49

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

Note that the only difference between an adaptor
and a linker is that the former has cohesive ends and
the latter has blunt ends. A wide range of adaptors is
available commercially.
Homopolymer tailing is a general method for
joining DNA molecules that has special uses
A general method for joining DNA molecules makes
use of the annealing of complementary homopolymer
sequences. Thus, by adding oligo(dA) sequences to
the 3′ ends of one population of DNA molecules and
oligo(dT) blocks to the 3′ ends of another population,
the two types of molecule can anneal to form mixed
dimeric circles (Fig. 3.11).
An enzyme purified from calf thymus, terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase, provides the means by
which the homopolymeric extensions can be synthesized, for if presented with a single deoxynucleotide
triphosphate it will repeatedly add nucleotides to the
3′ OH termini of a population of DNA molecules
(Chang & Bollum 1971). DNA with exposed 3′ OH
groups, such as arise from pretreatment with phage
λ exonuclease or restriction with an enzyme such as
PstI, is a very good substrate for the transferase.
However, conditions have been found in which the
enzyme will extend even the shielded 3′ OH of 5′
cohesive termini generated by EcoRI (Roychoudhury
et al. 1976, Humphries et al. 1978).
The terminal transferase reactions have been

5’
3’

characterized in detail with regard to their use in
gene manipulation (Deng & Wu 1981, Michelson
& Orkin 1982). Typically, 10–40 homopolymeric
residues are added to each end.
One of the earliest examples of the construction of
recombinant molecules, the insertion of a piece of λ
DNA into SV40 viral DNA, made use of homopolymer tailing (Jackson et al. 1972). In their experiments, the single-stranded gaps which remained in
the two strands at each join were repaired in vitro
with DNA polymerase and DNA ligase so as to
produce covalently closed circular molecules. The
recombinants were then transfected into susceptible
mammalian cells (see Chapter 12). Subsequently, the
homopolymer method, using either dA.dT or dG.dC
homopolymers was used extensively to construct
recombinant plasmids for cloning in E. coli. In recent
years, homopolymer tailing has been largely replaced
as a result of the availability of a much wider range of
restriction endonucleases and other DNA-modifying
enzymes. However, it is still important for cDNA
cloning (see p. 102 et seq.).
Special methods are often required if DNA
produced by PCR amplification is to be cloned
Many of the strategies for cloning DNA fragments
do not work well with PCR products. The reason for
this is that the polymerases used in the PCR have a
terminal transferase activity. For example, the Taq

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’
λ-exonuclease

λ-exonuclease
5’
3’

3’

5’

5’

3’

Terminal
transferase
+dATP
3’A(A)nA

5’
5’

Terminal
transferase
+dATP
5’

A(A)nA 3’

3’T(T)nT

Mix and
anneal

)T
T(T n A
)n
(
AA

) nA
A(A ) nT
T(T

Fig. 3.11 Use of
calf-thymus terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase to add
complementary
homopolymer tails to
two DNA molecules.

3’
5’

5’

T(T)nT 3’

50

CHAPTER 3

(a)
GG T G A NNNNNNNNNN – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
C C A C T NNNNNNNNNN – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

(b)

HphI
GG T G A A C C CGGG T T CG A – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – A G A A C C CGGG T T C A C C
C C A C T T GGGC CG A A GC T – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – T C T T GGGC C C A A G T GG
HphI
HphI

GG T G A A C C CGGG T
C C A C T T GGGC C C

C C CGGG T T C A C C
T GGGC C C A A G T GG

polymerase adds a single 3′ A overhang to each end
of the PCR product. Thus PCR products cannot be
blunt-end-ligated unless the ends are first polished
(blunted). A DNA polymerase like Klenow can be
used to fill in the ends. Alternatively, Pfu DNA polymerase can be used to remove extended bases with
its 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity. However, even when
the PCR fragments are polished, blunt-end-ligating
them into a vector still may be very inefficient. One
solution to this problem is to use T/A cloning (Mead
et al. 1991). In this method, the PCR fragment is
ligated to a vector DNA molecule with a single 3′
deoxythymidylate extension (Fig. 3.12).
A PCR primer may be designed which, in addition
to the sequence required for hybridization with the
input DNA, includes an extra sequence at its 5′ end.
The extra sequence does not participate in the first
hybridization step – only the 3′ portion of the primer
hybridizes – but it subsequently becomes incorporated
into the amplified DNA fragment (Fig. 3.13). Because
the extra sequence can be chosen at the will of the
experimenter, great flexibility is available here.
A common application of this principle is the
incorporation of restriction sites at each end of
the amplified product. Figure 3.13 illustrates the
addition of a HindIII site and an EcoRI site to the ends
of an amplified DNA fragment. In order to ensure
that the restriction sites are good substrates for the
restriction endonucleases, four nucleotides are placed
between the hexanucleotide restriction sites and the
extreme ends of the DNA. The incorporation of these
restriction sites provides one method for cloning
amplified DNA fragments (see below).
DNA molecules can be joined without
DNA ligase
In all the cutting and joining reactions described
above, two separate protein components were

Fig. 3.12 Cleavage
of a vector DNA
molecule to generate
single thymidylate
overhangs. (a) The
recognition sequence
and cleavage point for
the restriction
endonuclease HphI. (b)
Sequences in the vector
DNA which result in
desired overhangs after
cleavage with HphI.

required: a site-specific endonuclease and a DNA
ligase. Shuman (1994) has described a novel approach
to the synthesis of recombinant molecules in which a
single enzyme, vaccinia DNA topoisomerase, both
cleaves and rejoins DNA molecules. Placement of the
CCCTT cleavage motif for vaccinia topoisomerase
near the end of a duplex DNA permits efficient generation of a stable, highly recombinogenic protein
DNA adduct that can only religate to acceptor DNAs
that contain complementary single-strand extensions. Linear DNAs containing CCCTT cleavage sites
at both ends can be activated by topoisomerase and
inserted into a plasmid vector.
Heyman et al. (1999) have used the properties
of vaccinia topoisomerase to develop a ligase-free
technology for the covalent joining of DNA fragments to plasmid vectors. Whereas joining molecules
with DNA ligase requires an overnight incubation,
topoisomerase-mediated ligation occurs in 5 min.
The method is particularly suited to cloning PCR
fragments. A linearized vector with single 3′ T extensions is activated with the topoisomerase. On addition of the PCR product with 3′ A overhangs, ligation
is very rapid. In addition, the high substrate specificity
of the enzyme means that there is a low rate of formation of vectors without inserts.
Amplified DNA can be cloned using in vitro
recombination
Conservative site-specific recombinases (see Box 3.3)
are topoisomerases that catalyze rearrangements of
DNA at specific sequences that are considerably
longer than the cleavage sequence favored by vaccinia topoisomerase. These sites can be incorporated
into PCR-amplified fragments by including them
at the 5′ end of both of the amplification primers
in exactly the same way as shown in Fig. 3.13 for
restriction sites. All that is required to clone such

Target region
5‘

3‘

3‘

5‘
Denature, anneal primers 1 and 2

5‘

3‘
3‘

Primer 1
5‘ G C G C A A G
C

TT

CTT

A A G C C GG 5‘
Primer 2

3‘

3‘

5‘
PCR amplification
with primers 1 and 2

Target region

HindIII

EcoRI

5‘ GCGC A A GC T T

G A A T T CGGC C

3‘ CGCG T T CG A A

C T T A A GC CGG

Fig. 3.13 Incorporation of extra sequence at the 5′ end of a primer. Two primers have sequences designed to hybridize at the
ends of the target region. Primer 1 has an extra sequence near its 5′ end which forms a HindIII site (AAGCTT), and primer 2 has an
extra sequence near its 5′ end which forms an EcoRI (GAATTC) site. Each primer has an additional 5′-terminal sequence of four
nucleotides so that the hexanucleotide restriction sites are placed within the extreme ends of the amplified DNA, and so present
good substrates for endonuclease cleavage.

Box 3.3 Site-specific recombinases
Site-specific recombinases catalyze a
reciprocal double-stranded DNA exchange
between two DNA segments provided both
segments carry very specific sequences. The
target DNA sequences can be on the same
or different DNA molecules. If they are on
different molecules, and one of the molecules

is circular, then an insertion event will occur.
The best example of this is the chromosomal
insertion of the genome of bacteriophage l
during the process of lysogeny (Fig. B3.1).
However, if the two DNA molecules are
linear then segments of DNA will be
exchanged.

Recombinase
Recombinase

Recognition sequence

Fig. B3.1 The outcomes of recombinase action when the target sites are on different DNA molecules.
continued

Box 3.3
If the recognition sites for the recombinase
are on the same DNA molecule then the
outcome depends on their alignment. If the
two sites are aligned in the same direction
then the intervening DNA is deleted. If the two
sites are in opposite orientation then inversion
of the intervening DNA occurs (Fig. B3.2).
The site-specific recombinases catalyze DNA
exchange by two different mechanisms: the
Int–Flp and resolvase–invertase mechanisms.
Only the Int–Flp recombinases are used in
gene manipulation and the best-known ones
are phage l Int, Flp from the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the Cre protein
from bacteriophage P1. With some
recombinases, like Cre and Flp, the sites where
recombination takes place (Fig. B3.3) are
identical and the enzyme can function without
any accessory proteins.
With others, such as Int, the sites of
recombination exhibit homology but are not
c

continued

Fig. B3.2 The outcomes of recombinase action when
the target sequences are on the same DNA molecule.

identical and additional proteins are required
for activity (Fig. B3.4). All of them share a
conserved carboxyterminal region that
includes the active site tyrosine residue that
forms a covalent protein–DNA intermediate
during the recombination step. Since
recombination does not involve the gain or
loss of nucleotides it is said to be conservative.

b

a

5’

GA AG T T CC T A T GCCGA AG T T CC T A T T C T C T AGA A AG T A T AGGA A C T T C

3’

3’

C T T C A AGGA T A CGGC T T C A AGGA T A AG AGA T C T T T C A T A T CC T T GA AG

5’

Fig. B3.3 The recognition site (FRT) for the Flp recombinases. The site consists of three 13 bp symmetry elements (shown
by arrows), one of which (a) is in a different orientation to the other two (b and c). The “a” and “b” elements are separated by
an 8-bp asymmetric sequence across which recombination takes place. The “c” element is dispensable. The Cre recognition
site (loxP) is similar to FRT in consisting of two 13-bp inverted repeats separated by an asymmetric 8-bp region (Fig. 15.7).

P

P’
GC T T T T T T A T A C T T A
GC T T T T T T A T A C T A A

B

attP

B’

attB

Int protein plus
integration
host factors

attL

Int protein,
integration host
factors plus
excisionase

attR

Fig. B3.4 The integration of DNA into the chromosome of E. coli. The attP and attB sites are mostly dissimilar and have
only the central 15 bases in common (inset). Recombination occurs between the bases shown in red.

53

Cutting and joining DNA molecules

FRT

Am

on
pic
Am

on
plic

Flp recombinase
Vector

PCR
amplified
DNA

Fig. 3.14 Cloning PCR-amplified DNA using a site-specific recombinase. The DNA to be cloned is amplified using primers
containing the recognition site for a site-specific recombinase (in this case, FRT, the site for the Flp recombinase). The amplified
DNA is mixed with a vector containing two FRT sites and the Flp recombinase. The recombinase mediates the replacement of the
vector section between the two FRT sites with the amplified DNA.

amplified DNA is to mix it with a vector containing
two copies of the homologous recognition site
(Fig. 3.14). Two variations of this method have been
developed. In the original version, developed by
Hartley et al. (2000), the λ integrase (Int) is used
to catalyze the recombination event. This results
in a recombinant molecule in which the insert is
flanked by different sites than were present on the
original amplified DNA. In the variation described
by Sadowski (2003), the Flp recombinase is used
and this generates recombinants in which the flanking sites remain unchanged.
There are two major applications of cloning with
recombinases: recloning and recombineering. Once
a PCR amplicon has been cloned it may be necessary
to reclone it in another vector and the presence of
recombinase sites makes this recloning easy (Fig. 3.15).
A series of specialist vectors (the Gateway vectors)
have been designed for this purpose and these are
described on p. 94. In certain experiments it is
necessary to clone very large fragments of DNA
(>50 kb). It is difficult to manipulate in vitro vectors
containing such large inserts and usually it is preferable to do the manipulations in vivo. This is known
as recombineering and it is facilitated by the use of
the Cre and Flp recombinases in conjunction with
specialist vectors known as BACs and PACs (see
p. 76). Other applications of recombinases are
described in the review of Schweizer (2003).

Input
plasmid
1

Input
plasmid
2

Recombinase

Output
plasmid
1

Output
plasmid
2

Fig. 3.15 Using recombinases to move cloned DNA from
one vector to another.

54

CHAPTER 3

Suggested reading
Loenen W.A. (2003) Tracking EcoKI and DNA fifty
years on: a golden era full of surprises. Nucleic Acids
Research 31, 7059–69.
An excellent review of host-controlled restriction and
modification which provides an historical perspective on the
development of restriction enzymes.
Buryanov Y. & Shevchuk T. (2005) The use of prokaryotic DNA methylation transferases as experimental
and analytical tools in modern biology. Analytical
Biochemistry 338, 1–11.
Pingoud A., Fuxreiter M., Pingoud V. & Wende W.
(2005) Type II restriction endonucleases: structure
and mechanism. Cell and Molecular Life Sciences 62,
685–707.
Two reviews that provide additional detail to the material covered in this chapter.

Copeland N.G., Jenkins N.A. & Court D.L. (2001) Recombineering: a powerful new tool for mouse functional
genomics. Nature Reviews Genetics 2, 769–79.
Muyrers J.P.P., Zhang Y. & Stewart F. (2001)
Techniques: recombinogenic engineering – new
options for cloning and manipulating DNA. Trends in
Biochemical Sciences 26, 325–31.
Two excellent reviews on the topic of recombineering.

Useful website
http://www.neb.com/nebecomm/tech_reference/
New England Biolabs are the premier supplier of restriction enzymes and other enzymes involved in in vitro
gene manipulation. This website details everything
that you need to know before using any of these
enzymes.

CHAPTER 4
Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

Plasmid biology and simple plasmid vectors
Plasmids are widely used as cloning vehicles but,
before discussing their use in this context, it is
appropriate to review some of their basic properties.
Plasmids are replicons which are stably inherited
in an extrachromosomal state. Most plasmids exist
as double-stranded circular DNA molecules. If both
strands of DNA are intact circles the molecules are
described as covalently closed circles or CCC DNA
(Fig. 4.1). If only one strand is intact, then the
molecules are described as open circles or OC DNA.
When isolated from cells, covalently closed circles
often have a deficiency of turns in the double helix,
such that they have a supercoiled configuration. The
enzymatic interconversion of supercoiled, relaxed
CCC DNA1 and OC DNA is shown in Fig. 4.1. Because
of their different structural configurations, superSupercoiled
DNA

DNA gyrase

Endonuclease

Topoisomerase

Endonuclease

DNA ligase

Relaxed, covalently
closed circular DNA

coiled and OC DNA separate upon electrophoresis in
agarose gels (Fig. 4.2). Addition of an intercalating
agent, such as ethidium bromide, to supercoiled
DNA causes the plasmid to unwind. If excess ethidium bromide is added, the plasmid will rewind in the
opposite direction (Fig. 4.3). Use of this fact is made
in the isolation of plasmid DNA (see p. 59).
Not all plasmids exist as circular molecules. Linear
plasmids have been found in a variety of bacteria,
e.g. Streptomyces sp. and Borrelia burgdorferi. To prevent nuclease digestion, the ends of linear plasmids
need to be protected, and two general mechanisms
have evolved. Either there are repeated sequences
ending in a terminal DNA hairpin loop (Borrelia) or
the ends are protected by covalent attachment of a
protein (Streptomyces). For more details of linear
plasmids the reader should consult Hinnebusch and
Tilly (1993).
Plasmids are widely distributed throughout the
prokaryotes, vary in size from less than 1 × 106
daltons to greater than 200 × 106, and are generally
dispensable. Some of the phenotypes which these
plasmids confer on their host cells are listed in
Table 4.1. Plasmids to which phenotypic traits have
not yet been ascribed are called cryptic plasmids.
Plasmids can be categorized into one of two major
types – conjugative or non-conjugative – depending
upon whether or not they carry a set of transfer
genes, called the tra genes, which promote bacterial
conjugation. Plasmids can also be categorized on the
basis of their being maintained as multiple copies
per cell (relaxed plasmids) or as a limited number of
copies per cell (stringent plasmids). Generally, conjugative plasmids are of relatively high molecular
weight and are present as one to three copies per
chromosome, whereas non-conjugative plasmids

Open circular DNA

Fig. 4.1 The interconversion of supercoiled, relaxed
covalently closed circular DNA and open circular DNA.

1

The reader should not be confused by the terms relaxed circle
and relaxed plasmid. Relaxed circles are CCC DNA that does
not have a supercoiled configuration. Relaxed plasmids are
plasmids with multiple copies per cell.

56

CHAPTER 4

A

A

B

B

C
Direction of
migration

OC
L

D

E
SC

Fig. 4.2 Electrophoresis of DNA in agarose gels. The
direction of migration is indicated by the arrow. DNA
bands have been visualized by soaking the gel in a solution
of ethidium bromide (which complexes with DNA by
intercalating between stacked base pairs) and photographing
the orange fluorescence which results upon ultraviolet
irradiation. (A) Open circular (OC) and supercoiled (SC) forms
of a plasmid of 6.4 kb pairs. Note that the compact supercoils
migrate considerably faster than open circles. (B) Linear
plasmid (L) DNA is produced by treatment of the preparation
shown in lane (A) with EcoRI, for which there is a single
target site. Under the conditions of electrophoresis employed
here, the linear form migrates just ahead of the open
circular form.

are of low molecular weight and are present as multiple copies per chromosome (Table 4.2). An exception
is the conjugative plasmid R6K, which has a molecular weight of 25 × 106 daltons and is maintained as a
relaxed plasmid.

Fig. 4.3 Effect of intercalation of ethidium bromide on
supercoiling of DNA. As the amount of intercalated ethidium
bromide increases, the double helix untwists, with the result
that the supercoiling decreases until the relaxed form of the
circular molecule is produced. Further intercalation
introduces excess turns in the double helix, resulting in
supercoiling in the opposite sense (note the direction of
coiling at B and D). For clarity, only a single line represents
the double helix.

Table 4.1 Some phenotypic traits exhibited by
plasmid-carried genes.

Antibiotic resistance
Antibiotic production
Degradation of aromatic compounds
Hemolysin production
Sugar fermentation
Enterotoxin production
Heavy-metal resistance
Bacteriocin production
Induction of plant tumors
Hydrogen sulfide production
Host-controled restriction and modification

57

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

Table 4.2 Properties of some conjugative and non-conjugative plasmids of Gram-negative organisms.

Plasmid
Col E1
RSF1030
clo DF13
R6K
F
RI
Ent P 307

No. of plasmid copies/
Size (MDa) Conjugative chromosome equivalent
4.2
5.6
6
25
62
62.5
65

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The host range of plasmids is determined by
the replication proteins that they encode
Plasmids encode only a few of the proteins required
for their own replication and in many cases encode
only one of them. All the other proteins required
for replication, e.g. DNA polymerases, DNA ligase,
helicases, etc., are provided by the host cell. Those
replication proteins that are plasmid-encoded are
located very close to the ori (origin of replication)
sequences at which they act. Thus, only a small
region surrounding the ori site is required for replication. Other parts of the plasmid can be deleted and
foreign sequences can be added to the plasmid and
replication will still occur. This feature of plasmids
has greatly simplified the construction of versatile
cloning vectors.
The host range of a plasmid is determined by
its ori region. Plasmids whose ori region is derived
from plasmid Col E1 have a restricted host range:
they only replicate in enteric bacteria, such as E. coli,
Salmonella, etc. Other promiscuous plasmids have
a broad host range and these include RP4 and
RSF1010. Plasmids of the RP4 type will replicate
in most Gram-negative bacteria, to which they are
readily transmitted by conjugation. Such promiscuous plasmids offer the potential of readily transferring cloned DNA molecules into a wide range of
genetic backgrounds. Plasmids like RSF1010 are
not conjugative but can be transformed into a wide
range of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria,
where they are stably maintained. Many of the plasmids isolated from Staphylococcus aureus also have a
broad host range and can replicate in many other
Gram-positive bacteria. Plasmids with a broad host
range encode most, if not all, of the proteins required
for replication. They must also be able to express

10–15
20–40
10
13–38
1–2
3–6
1–3

Phenotype
Col E1 production
Ampicillin resistance
Cloacin production
Ampicillin and streptomycin resistance
–
Multiple drug resistance
Enterotoxin production

these genes and thus their promoters and ribosome
binding sites must have evolved such that they can
be recognized in a diversity of bacterial families.
The number of copies of a plasmid in a cell
varies between plasmids and is determined
by the regulatory mechanisms controlling
replication
The copy number of a plasmid is determined by
regulating the initiation of plasmid replication. Two
major mechanisms of control of initiation have been
recognized: regulation by antisense RNA and regulation by binding of essential proteins to repeated
sequences called iterons (for reviews, see Del Solar
et al. 1998 and Grabherr & Bayer 2002). Most of the
cloning vectors in current use carry an ori region
derived from plasmid Col E1 and copy-number control is mediated by antisense RNA. In this type of
plasmid, the primer for DNA replication is a 555base ribonucleotide molecule called RNA II, which
forms an RNA–DNA hybrid at the replication origin
(Tomizawa & Itoh 1982). RNA II can only act as a
primer if it is cleaved by RNase H to leave a free 3′
hydroxyl group. Unless RNA II is processed in this
way, it will not function as a primer and replication
will not ensue. Replication control is mediated by
another small (108-base) RNA molecule called RNA
I (Tomizawa & Itoh 1981), which is encoded by the
same region of DNA as RNA II but by the complementary strand. Thus RNA I and RNA II are complementary to each other and can hybridize to form a
double-stranded RNA helix. The formation of this
duplex interferes with the processing of RNA II
by RNase H and hence replication does not ensue
(Fig. 4.4). Since RNA I is encoded by the plasmid,
more of it will be synthesized when the copy number

58

CHAPTER 4

Rop dimer

RNA I

ρ RNAI

ρrop

Origin

5‘
3‘

3‘
5‘

ρ RNAII
RNA II
Infrequently

Frequently
3‘

5‘

RNA II

RNA I
5‘

5‘

RNA II

RNase H

5‘

RNA II
3‘
5‘

3‘
5‘
RNA I-RNA II duplex

Pol I
RNA II primes
DNA synthesis

RNA II inactivated for
primer function

Replication
No replication

of the plasmid is high. As the host cell grows and
divides, so the concentration of RNA I will fall and
the plasmid will begin to replicate again (Cesarini et
al. 1991, Eguchi et al. 1991).
In addition to RNA I, a plasmid-encoded protein
called Rop helps maintain the copy number (Cesarini
et al. 1982). This protein, which forms a dimer,
enhances the pairing between RNA I and RNA II so
that processing of the primer can be inhibited even at
relatively low concentrations of RNA I. Deletion of
the ROP gene (Twigg & Sherratt 1980) or mutations
in RNA I (Muesing et al. 1981) result in increased
copy numbers.
In plasmid pSC101 and many of the broadhost-range plasmids, the ori region contains three to
seven copies of an iteron sequence which is 17 to 22
bp long. Close to the ori region there is a gene, called
repA in pSC101, which encodes the RepA protein.
This protein, which is the only plasmid-encoded pro-

Fig. 4.4 Regulation
of replication of Col E1derived plasmids. RNA
II must be processed by
RNase H before it can
prime replication.
“Origin” indicates the
transition point
between the RNA
primer and DNA. Most
of the time, RNA I binds
to RNA II and inhibits
the processing, thereby
regulating the copy
number. ρRNAI and
ρRNA II are the
promoters for RNA I
and RNA II
transcription,
respectively. RNA I is
colored pale purple
and RNA II dark purple.
The Rop protein dimer
enhances the initial
pairing of RNA I and
RNA II.

tein required for replication, binds to the iterons and
initiates DNA synthesis (Fig. 4.5).
Copy-number control is exerted by two superimposed mechanisms. First, the RepA protein represses
its own synthesis by binding to its own promoter
region and blocking transcription of its own gene
(Ingmer & Cohen 1993). If the copy number is high,
synthesis of RepA will be repressed. After cell division, the copy number and concentration of RepA
will drop and replication will be initiated. Mutations
in the RepA protein can lead to increased copy number (Ingmer & Cohen 1993, Cereghino et al. 1994).
Secondly, the RepA protein can link two plasmids
together, by binding to their iteron sequences, thereby
preventing them from initiating replication. By this
mechanism, known as handcuffing (McEachern et al.
1989), the replication of iteron plasmids will depend
both on the concentration of RepA protein and on
the concentration of the plasmids themselves.

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

ori
bp

200

400

par

DnaA

600

800

inc

R1 R2

R3

1000

1200

repA

IR1

IR2

repA

–35 –10
mRNA

Fig. 4.5 The ori region of pSC101. R1, R2,
and R3 are the three iteron sequences
(CAAAGGTCTAGCAGCAGAATTTACAGA for R3) to which
RepA binds to handcuff two plasmids. RepA autoregulates its
own synthesis by binding to the inverted repeats IR1 and IR2.
The location of the partitioning site par and the binding sites
for the host protein DnaA are also shown.

The stable maintenance of plasmids in cells
requires a specific partitioning mechanism
The loss of plasmids due to defective partitioning
(segregation when the cell divides) is called segregative instability. Naturally occurring plasmids are
stably maintained because they contain a partitioning function, par, which ensures that they are stably
maintained at each cell division. Such par regions are
essential for stability of low-copy-number plasmids
(for review, see Bingle & Thomas 2001). The highercopy-number plasmid Col E1 also contains a par
region but this is deleted in many Col E1-derived
cloning vectors, e.g. pBR322. Although the copy
number of vectors such as pBR322 is usually high,
plasmid-free cells arise under nutrient limitation or
other stress conditions (Jones et al. 1980, Nugent et
al. 1983). The par region from a plasmid such as
pSC101 can be cloned into pBR322, thereby stabilizing the plasmid (Primrose et al. 1983).
DNA superhelicity is involved in the partitioning
mechanism (Miller et al. 1990). pSC101 derivatives
lacking the par locus show decreased overall superhelical density as compared with wild-type pSC101.
Partition-defective mutants of pSC101 and similar
mutants of unrelated plasmids are stabilized in
Escherichia coli by topA mutations, which increase
negative DNA supercoiling. Conversely, DNA gyrase
inhibitors and mutations in DNA gyrase increase
the rate of loss of par-defective pSC101 derivatives.
Plasmid instability may also arise due to the
formation of multimeric forms of a plasmid. The
mechanism that controls the copy number of a
plasmid ensures a fixed number of plasmid origins
per bacterium. Cells containing multimeric plasmids

59

have the same number of plasmid origins but fewer
plasmid molecules, which leads to segregative instability if they lack a partitioning function. These
multimeric forms are not seen with Col E1, which
has a natural method of resolving multimers back to
monomers. It contains a highly recombinogenic site
(cer). If the cer sequence occurs more than once in a
plasmid, as in a multimer, the host-cell Xer protein
promotes recombination, thereby regenerating monomers (Summers & Sherratt 1984, Guhathakurta
et al. 1996; for review, see Summers 1998).
Plasmids with similar replication and
partitioning systems cannot be maintained
in the same cell
Plasmid incompatibility is the inability of two different plasmids to coexist in the same cell in the absence
of selection pressure. The term incompatibility can only
be used when it is certain that entry of the second
plasmid has taken place and that DNA restriction is
not involved. Groups of plasmids which are mutually
incompatible are considered to belong to the same
incompatibility (Inc) group. Over 30 incompatibility
groups have been defined in E. coli and 13 for plasmids of S. aureus. Plasmids will be incompatible
if they have the same mechanism of replication control. Not surprisingly, by changing the sequence of
the RNA I/RNA II region of plasmids with antisense
control of copy number, it is possible to change
their incompatibility group. Alternatively, they will
be incompatible if they share the same par region
(Austin & Nordstrom 1990, Firsheim & Kim 1997).
The purification of plasmid DNA
An obvious prerequisite for cloning in plasmids is
the purification of the plasmid DNA. Although a wide
range of plasmid DNAs are now routinely purified,
the methods used are not without their problems.
Undoubtedly the trickiest stage is the lysis of the host
cells; both incomplete lysis and total dissolution of
the cells result in greatly reduced recoveries of plasmid DNA. The ideal situation occurs when each cell
is just sufficiently broken to permit the plasmid DNA
to escape without too much contaminating chromosomal DNA. Provided the lysis is done gently, most
of the chromosomal DNA released will be of high
molecular weight and can be removed, along with
cell debris, by high-speed centrifugation to yield a
cleared lysate. The production of satisfactory cleared
lysates from bacteria other than E. coli, particularly

60

CHAPTER 4

if large plasmids are to be isolated, is frequently a
combination of skill, luck, and patience.
Many methods are available for isolating pure
plasmid DNA from cleared lysates but only two will
be described here. The first of these is the “classical”
method and is due to Vinograd (Radloff et al. 1967).
This method involves isopycnic centrifugation of
cleared lysates in a solution of CsCl containing
ethidium bromide (EtBr). EtBr binds by intercalating
between the DNA base pairs, and in so doing causes
the DNA to unwind. A CCC DNA molecule, such as
a plasmid, has no free ends and can only unwind to
a limited extent, thus limiting the amount of EtBr
bound. A linear DNA molecule, such as fragmented
chromosomal DNA, has no such topological constraints and can therefore bind more of the EtBr
molecules. Because the density of the DNA–EtBr
complex decreases as more EtBr is bound, and
because more EtBr can be bound to a linear molecule
than to a covalent circle, the covalent circle has a
higher density at saturating concentrations of EtBr.
Thus covalent circles (i.e. plasmids) can be separated
from linear chromosomal DNA (Fig. 4.6).
Currently the most popular method of extracting
and purifying plasmid DNA is that of Birnboim and
Doly (1979). This method makes use of the observation that there is a narrow range of pH (12.0–12.5)

Upper band containing
chromosomal DNA and
open plasmid circles

Lower band of
covalently closed
circular plasmid DNA

Fig. 4.6 Purification of Col E1 KanR plasmid DNA by
isopycnic centrifugation in a CsCl–EtBr gradient.
(Photograph by courtesy of Dr. G. Birnie.)

within which denaturation of linear DNA, but not
covalently closed circular DNA, occurs. Plasmidcontaining cells are treated with lysozyme to weaken
the cell wall and then lysed with sodium hydroxide
and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Chromosomal
DNA remains in a high-molecular-weight form but
is denatured. Upon neutralization with acidic sodium
acetate, the chromosomal DNA renatures and aggregates to form an insoluble network. Simultaneously,
the high concentration of sodium acetate causes
precipitation of protein–SDS complexes and of highmolecular-weight RNA. Provided the pH of the alkaline denaturation step has been carefully controlled,
the CCC plasmid DNA molecules will remain in a
native state and in solution, while the contaminating macromolecules co-precipitate. The precipitate
can be removed by centrifugation and the plasmid
concentrated by ethanol precipitation. If necessary,
the plasmid DNA can be purified further by gel
filtration.
A number of commercial suppliers of convenience
molecular biology products have developed kits to
improve the yield and purity of plasmid DNA. All of
them take advantage of the benefits of alkaline lysis
and have as their starting point the cleared lysate.
With most of these kits, the plasmid DNA is selectively
bound to an ion-exchange resin in the presence of a
chaotropic agent (e.g. guanidinium isothiocyanate).
The purified plasmid DNA is eluted in a small volume
after washing away the contaminants. If traces of
guanidinium isothiocyanate, or any other solvents
that are used, contaminate the plasmid DNA then
they can be inhibitory to the PCR and other enzymic
reactions. This problem can be eliminated by the
use of Charge Switch™ technology (European Patent EP98957019.7) that involves materials that
behave as pH-dependent ionic switches. At low pH
values, these materials are positively charged and
bind DNA selectively. On raising the pH, the charge
is switched off and the DNA is eluted free of all other
reagents.
The yield of plasmid is affected by a number of
factors. The first of these is the actual copy number
inside the cells at the time of harvest. The copynumber control systems described earlier are not the
only factors affecting yield. The copy number is also
affected by the growth medium, the stage of growth
and the genotype of the host cell (Nugent et al. 1983,
Seelke et al. 1987, Duttweiler & Gross 1998). The
second and most important factor is the care taken in
making the cleared lysate. Unfortunately, the commercially available kits have not removed the vagaries
of this procedure. Finally, the presence in the host

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

cell of a wild-type endA gene can affect the recovery
of plasmid. The product of the endA gene is endonuclease I, a periplasmic protein whose substrate is
double-stranded DNA. The function of endonuclease
I is not fully understood. Strains bearing endA mutations have no obvious phenotype other than improved
stability and yield of plasmid obtained from them.
Although most cloning vehicles are of low molecular weight (see next section), it is sometimes necessary to use the much larger conjugative plasmids.
Although these high-molecular-weight plasmids can
be isolated by the methods just described, the yields
are often very low. Either there is inefficient release
of the plasmids from the cells as a consequence of
their size or there is physical destruction caused by
shear forces during the various manipulative steps.
A number of alternative procedures have been
described (Gowland & Hardmann 1986), many of
which are a variation on that of Eckhardt (1978).
Bacteria are suspended in a mixture of Ficoll and
lysozyme and this results in a weakening of the cell
walls. The samples are then placed in the slots of an
agarose gel, where the cells are lysed by the addition

of detergent. The plasmids are subsequently extracted
from the gel following electrophoresis. The use of
agarose, which melts at low temperature, facilitates
extraction of the plasmid from the gel.
Good plasmid cloning vehicles share a
number of desirable features
An ideal cloning vehicle would have the following
three properties:
•
•
•

low molecular weight;
ability to confer readily selectable phenotypic
traits on host cells;
single sites for a large number of restriction endonucleases, preferably in genes with a readily
scorable phenotype (see Box 4.1).

The advantages of a low molecular weight are
several. First, the plasmid is much easier to handle,
i.e. it is more resistant to damage by shearing, and
is readily isolated from host cells. Secondly, lowmolecular-weight plasmids are usually present as

Box 4.1 Selectable markers and reporter genes for use with bacterial vectors
The judicious choice of markers on cloning
vectors can greatly simplify the selection
and analysis of recombinant clones. A key
step in any cloning procedure is the selection
of transformants carrying the desired
recombinant plasmid. Because transformation
efficiencies are so low it is essential to be able
to select positively those rare cells that have
been transformed. The commonest selectable
markers are ones encoding resistance to
antibiotics such as ampicillin (ApR),
chloramphenicol (CmR), tetracycline (Tc R),
streptomycin (SmR), and kanamycin (KmR).
Another type of positive selection is reversal
of auxotrophy. For example, if the hisB+ gene
is cloned in a vector then it is easy to select
recombinants by transforming a hisB
auxotroph and growing it in a medium lacking
histidine. The supE (also known as glnV) and
supF (also known as tyrT) genes encode
tRNA molecules that suppress amber (UAG)
mutations in essential genes of the vector host
cells. Some other markers are useful because
their inactivation can be positively selected.
Two such markers are:

61

sacB

The sacB gene encodes levansucrase
and its activity is lethal to cells
growing on medium containing
7% sucrose.
ccdB The ccdB gene is lethal to host cells
unless they carry the DNA gyrase
mutation gyrA.
Reporter genes are ones whose phenotype
can be discerned by visual examination of
colonies growing on a plate and/or ones
that can be used to measure levels of
gene expression. In terms of analysis of
recombinants, the most widely used
reporter gene is the lacZ gene encoding
b-galactosidase. As noted in Box 3.2, the
presence or absence of b-galactosidase activity
is easily detected by growing cells on medium
containing the chromogenic substrate Xgal.
Another gene whose activity can be detected
in a similar way is the gusA gene encoding
b-glucuronidase. This enzyme cleaves
4-methylumbelliferyl-b-D-glucuronide (MUG)
to release a blue pigment. Further reporter
genes are discussed in Chapters 12, 14, and 15.

62

CHAPTER 4

multiple copies (see Table 4.2), and this not only
facilitates their isolation but leads to gene dosage
effects for all cloned genes. Finally, with a low molecular weight there is less chance that the vector will
have multiple substrate sites for any restriction
endonuclease (see below).
After a piece of foreign DNA is inserted into a
vector, the resulting chimeric molecules have to
be transformed into a suitable recipient. Since the
efficiency of transformation is so low, it is essential
that the chimeras have some readily scorable phenotype. Usually this results from some gene, e.g. antibiotic resistance, carried on the vector, but could also
be produced by a gene carried on the inserted DNA.
One of the first steps in cloning is to cut the vector
DNA and the DNA to be inserted with either the same
endonuclease or ones producing the same ends. If
the vector has more than one site for the endonuclease, more than one fragment will be produced. When
the two samples of cleaved DNA are subsequently
mixed and ligated, the resulting chimeras will, in
all probability, lack one of the vector fragments.
It is advantageous if insertion of foreign DNA at
endonuclease-sensitive sites inactivates a gene whose
phenotype is readily scorable, for in this way it is
(a)

possible to distinguish chimeras from cleaved plasmid molecules which have self-annealed. Of course,
readily detectable insertional inactivation is not
essential if the vector and insert are to be joined by
the homopolymer tailing method (see p. 49) or if the
insert confers a new phenotype on host cells.
pBR322 is an early example of a widely used,
purpose-built cloning vector
In early cloning experiments, the cloning vectors
used were natural plasmid such as Col E1 and
pSC101. While these plasmids are small and have
single sites for the common restriction endonucleases, they have limited genetic markers for selecting
transformants. For this reason, considerable effort
was expended on constructing, in vitro, superior
cloning vectors. The best, and most widely used of
these early purpose-built vectors is pBR322. Plasmid
pBR322 contains the ApR and TcR genes of RSF2124
and pSC101, respectively, combined with replication
elements of pMB1, a Col E1-like plasmid (Fig. 4.7a).
The origins of pBR322 and its progenitor, pBR313,
are shown in Fig. 4.7b, and details of its construction
can be found in the papers of Bolivar et al. (1977a,b).
(b)

RSF 2124-derived
material

1

R1 drd 19
ApR CmR SmR
SuR KmR

4361/1
pSC101-derived
material

EcoRI

pMB1

2
ColE1

R

A

R7268
ApR

p

5
R
Tc

pMB3
ApR
pSF2124
ApR

3145

Or

3
pSC101
TcR

igin

1763
pMB1-derived material

pMB8
4
6
pMB9
TcR

6
pBR312
ApR TcR
7

pBR313
ApR TcR

8

pBR322
ApR TcR

Fig. 4.7 The origins of plasmid pBR322. (a) The boundaries between the pSC101, pMB1, and RSF2124-derived material.
The numbers indicate the positions of the junctions in base pairs from the unique EcoRI site. (b) The molecular origins of plasmid
pBR322. R7268 was isolated in London in 1963 and later renamed R1. 1, A variant, R1drd19, which was derepressed for mating
transfer, was isolated. 2, The ApR transposon, Tn3, from this plasmid was transposed on to pMB1 to form pMB3.3, This plasmid
was reduced in size by EcoRI* rearrangement to form a tiny plasmid, pMB8, which carries only colicin immunity. 4, EcoRI*
fragments from pSC101 were combined with pMB8 opened at its unique EcoRI site and the resulting chimeric molecule rearranged
by EcoRI* activity to generate pMB9. 5, In a separate event, the Tn3 of R1drd19 was transposed to Col E1 to form pSF2124. 6, The
Tn3 element was then transposed to pMB9 to form pBR312. 7, EcoRI* rearrangement of pBR312 led to the formation of pBR313,
from which (8) two separate fragments were isolated and ligated together to form pBR322. During this series of constructions, R1
and Col E1 served only as carries for Tn3. (Reproduced by courtesy of Dr. G. Sutcliffe and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.)

63

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

Plasmid pBR322 has been completely sequenced.
The original published sequence (Sutcliffe 1979)
was 4362 bp long. Position O of the sequence was
arbitrarily set between the A and T residues of the
EcoRI recognition sequence (GAATTC). The sequence
was revised by the inclusion of an additional CG base
pair at position 526, thus increasing the size of the
plasmid to 4363 bp (Backman & Boyer 1983, Peden
1983). Watson (1988) later revised the size yet
again, this time to 4361 bp, by eliminating base
EcoRI - Apo I 4359
Aat II 4284

pairs at coordinates 1893 and 1915. The most
useful aspect of the DNA sequence is that it totally
characterizes pBR322 in terms of its restriction sites,
such that the exact length of every fragment can
be calculated. These fragments can serve as DNA
markers for sizing any other DNA fragment in the
range of several base pairs up to the entire length of
the plasmid.
There are over 40 enzymes with unique cleavage
sites on the pBR322 genome (Fig. 4.8). The target
Cla I - BspD I 23
Hind III 29
EcoR V 185
Nhe I 229

BsrB - Bci V I 4209

BamH I 375

Ssp I 4168

SgrA I 409
Ban II 471
Ban II 485
Dsa I 528

Ear I 4155
Eco57 I 4054
Xmn I 3961
Hinc II 3905

Sph I 562

Sca I 3844

EcoN I 622
Sal I 651

Pvu I 3733

Hinc II 651

BsrD I 3608

Acc I 651

Ap

Tc

Pst I 3607

PshA I 712

Ase I 3537
Eag I 939
Bsa I 3433
BsrD I 3420

Nru I 972

Ahd I 3361

BstAP I 1045
BspM I 1063

PflM I 1315
Bsm I 1353
Sty I 1369

Eco57 I 3000
I

OR

PflM I 1364

AlwN I 2884

Ava I - BsoB I 1425
PpuM I 1438
Msc I 1444

BciV I 2682
Drd I 2575

Dsa I 1447
ROP

Afl III - BspLU11 I 2473
BsrB I 2408
Ear I 2351
Sap I 2350
Nde I 2295
BstAP I 2291
BstZ17 I - Acc I 2244
BsaA I 2225

PpuM I 1480
Bsg I 1656

Xmn I 2029
Pvu II 2064

BspE I 1664
BsaB I 1668

BsmB I 2122
Drd I 2162
PflFI - Tth111 I 2217

Fig. 4.8 Restriction map of plasmid pBR322 showing the location and direction of transcription of the ampicillin (Ap) and
tetracycline (Tc) resistance loci, the origin of replication (ori), and the Col E1-derived Rop gene. The map shows the restriction sites
of those enzymes that cut the molecule once or twice. The unique sites are shown in bold type. The coordinates refer to the position
of the 5′ base in each recognition sequence with the first T in the EcoRI site being designated as nucleotide number 1. The exact
positions of the loci are: Tc, 86–1268; Ap, 4084–3296; Rop, 1918–2105 and the origin of replication, 2535.

64

CHAPTER 4

sites of 11 of these enzymes lie within the tetracycline
resistant (TcR) gene, and there are sites for a further
two (ClaI and HindIII) within the promoter of that
gene. There are unique sites for six enzymes within
the ampicillin resistant (ApR) gene. Thus, cloning in
pBR322 with the aid of any one of those 19 enzymes
will result in insertional inactivation of either the
ApR or the TcR markers. However, cloning in the
other unique sites does not permit the easy selection
of recombinants, because neither of the antibiotic
resistance determinants is inactivated.
Following manipulation in vitro, E. coli cells transformed with plasmids with inserts in the TcR gene
can be distinguished from those cells transformed
with recircularized vector. The former are ApR and
tetracycline sensitive (TcS), whereas the latter are
both ApR and TcR. In practice, transformants are
selected on the basis of their Ap resistance and then
replica-plated onto Tc-containing media to identify
those that are TcS. Cells transformed with pBR322
derivatives carrying inserts in the ApR gene can be
identified more readily (Boyko & Ganschow 1982).
Detection is based upon the ability of the β-lactamase
produced by ApR cells to convert penicillin to penicilloic acid, which in turn binds iodine. Transformants
are selected on rich medium containing soluble
starch and Tc. When colonized plates are flooded
with an indicator solution of iodine and penicillin,
β-lactamase-producing (ApR) colonies clear the
indicator solution whereas ampicillin sensitive
(ApS) colonies do not.
The PstI site in the ApR gene is particularly useful,
because the 3′ tetranucleotide extensions formed on
digestion are ideal substrates for terminal transferase. Thus this site is excellent for cloning by the
homopolymer tailing method described in the previous chapter (see p. 49). If oligo-(dG.dC) tailing is
used, the PstI site is regenerated (see Fig. 3.11) and
the insert may be cut out with that enzyme.
Plasmid pBR322 has been a widely used cloning
vehicle. In addition, it has been widely used as a
model system for the study of prokaryotic transcription and translation, as well as investigation of the
effects of topological changes on DNA conformation.
The popularity of pBR322 is a direct result of the
availability of an extensive body of information on
its structure and function. This in turn is increased
with each new study. The reader wishing more detail
on the structural features, transcriptional signals,
replication, amplification, stability, and conjugal
mobility of pBR322 should consult the review of
Balbás et al. (1986).

Example of the use of plasmid pBR322 as a
vector: isolation of DNA fragments which
carry promoters
Cloning into the HindIII site of pBR322 generally
results in loss of tetracycline resistance. However,
in some recombinants, TcR is retained or even
increased. This is because the HindIII site lies within
the promoter rather than the coding sequence.
Thus whether or not insertional inactivation occurs
depends on whether the cloned DNA carries a
promoter-like sequence able to initiate transcription of the TcR gene. Widera et al. (1978) have used
this technique to search for promoter-containing
fragments.
Four structural domains can be recognized within
E. coli promoters. These are:
•
•
•
•

position 1, the purine initiation nucleotide from
which RNA synthesis begins;
position −6 to −12, the Pribnow box;
the region around base pair −35;
the sequence between base pairs −12 and −35.

Although the HindIII site lies within the Pribnow
box (Rodriguez et al. 1979) the box is recreated on
insertion of a foreign DNA fragment. Thus when
insertional inactivation occurs it must be the region
from −13 to −40 which is modified.
A large number of improved vectors have
been derived from pBR322
Over the years, numerous different derivatives of
pBR322 have been constructed, many to fulfil
special-purpose cloning needs. A compilation of the
properties of some of these plasmids has been
provided by Balbás et al. (1986).
Much of the early work on the improvement of
pBR322 centered on the insertion of additional unique
restriction sites and selectable markers, e.g. pBR325
encodes chloramphenicol resistance in addition to
ampicillin and tetracycline resistance and has a
unique EcoRI site in the CmR gene. Initially, each
new vector was constructed in a series of steps analogous to those used in the generation of pBR322
itself (Fig. 4.7). Then the construction of improved
vectors was simplified (Vieira & Messing 1982,
1987, Yanisch-Perron et al. 1985) by the use of
polylinkers or multiple cloning sites (MCSs), as exemplified by the pUC vectors (Fig. 4.9). An MCS is a
short DNA sequence, 2.8 kb in the case of pUC19,

65

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

8
7
6
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 5
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
THR MET ILE THR pro ser leu his ala cys arg ser thr leu glu asp pro arg val pro ser ser ASN SER LEU ALA
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG CGA AGC TTG CAT GCC TGC AGG TCG ACT CTA GAG GAT CCC CGG GTA CCG AGC TCG AAT TCA CTG GCC
HindIII
SphI
PsfI
SalI
XbaI
BamHI
KpnI
SstI
EcoRI
HaeIII
AccI
XmaI
HincII
SmaI
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 7
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
cys arg his ala ser leu ala LEU ALA
thr
ser
glu
leu
pro
asp
gly
pro
val
ser
ser
SER
ASN
THR
ILE
MET
THR
pUC18
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG AAT TCG AGC TCG GTA CCC GGG GAT CCT CTA GAG TCG ACC TGC AGG CAT GCA AGC TTG GCA CTG GCC
EcoRI
SstI
KpnI
BamHI
XbaI
SalI
PstI
SphI
HindIII
HaeIII
AccI
XmaI
HincII
SmaI
8
7
6
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 5
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
THR MET ILE THR pro ser leu gly cys arg ser thr leu glu asp pro arg ala ser ser ASN SER LEU ALA
pUC13
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG CCA AGC TTG GGC TGC AGG TCG ACT CTA GAG GAT CCC CGG GCG AGC TCG AAT TCA CTG GCC
HindIII
PstI
SalI
XbaI
BamHI
SstI
EcoRI
HaeIII
AccI
XmaI
HincII
SmaI
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
8
7
6
5
4
2
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
3
THR MET ILE THR ASN SER ser ser pro gly asp pro leu glu ser thr cys ser pro ser leu ala LEU ALA
pUC12
ACC TGC AGC CCA AGC TTG GCA CTG GCC
TCG
GAG
CTA
CCT
GAT
GGG
TCG
AGC
TCG
CCC
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG AAT
SstI
BamHI
XbaI
SalI
PstI
HindIII
HaeIII
EcoRI
AccI
XmaI
HincII
SmaI

pUC19

8
7
6
9 10 11 5
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
THR MET ILE THR pro ser leu ala ala gly arg arg ile pro gly ASN SER LEU ALA
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG CCA AGC TTG GCT GCA GGT CGA CGG ATC CCC GGG AAT TCA CTG GCC
EcoRI
HaeIII
HindIII
PstI
SalI
BamHI
AccI
XmaI
HincII
SmaI
8
9 10 11 7
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
ser leu ala LEU ALA
pro
gln
leu
asp
val
ser
gly
arg
SER
ASN
THR
ILE
MET
THR
pUC8
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG AAT TCC CGG GGA TCC GTC GAC CTG CAG CCA AGC TTG GCA CTG GCC
EcoRI
BamHI
SalI
PstI
HindIII
HaeIII
AccI
XmaI
HincII
SmaI
9 10 11 12 13 14 6
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
THR MET ILE THR ASN ser pro asp pro ser thr cys arg ser thr asp pro gly asn SER
pUC7
ATG ACC ATG ATT ACG AAT TCC CCG GAT CCG TCG ACC TGC AGG TCG ACG GAT CCG GGG AAT TCA
PstI
BamHI
EcoRI
SalI
EcoRI
BamHI
SalI
AccI
AccI
HincII
HincII

pUC9

BsmB I 51 Nde I 183
BstAP I 179
Drd I 91
Nar I- Kas I-Sfo I 235
Bgl I 245
Fsp I 256
Pvu I 276
lac
Pvu II 306

Z

BsmB I 2683
EcoO 109 I 2674
Aat II 2617
Bci V I 2542
Ssp I 2501
Eco57 I 2381
Acl I 2297
Xmn I 2294

Polylinker
cloning sites
396-454

Bcg I 2215
Sca I 2177

Pvu II 628
Tfi I 641
Sap I 683

AP

Pvu I 2066
Ava II 2059
BsrD I 1935
Acl I 1924
Fsp I 1919

Tfi I 781
Afl III 806

Ava II 1837
Bgl I 1813
Bpm I 1784
BsrF I 1779
Bsa I 1766
BsrD I 1753

Drd I 908
BciV I 1015
I
OR

Ahd I 1694
Eco57 I 1333

AlwN I 1217

Fig. 4.9 Genetic maps of some pUC plasmids. The multiple cloning site (MCS) is inserted into the lacZ′ gene but does not interfere
with gene function. The additional codons present in the lacZ′ gene as a result of the polylinker are labeled with lower-case letters.
These polylinker regions (MCS) are identical to those of the M13 mp series of vectors (see p. 73).

66

CHAPTER 4

carrying sites for many different restriction endonucleases. An MCS increases the number of potential
cloning strategies available by extending the range
of enzymes that can be used to generate a restriction
fragment suitable for cloning. By combining them
within an MCS, the sites are made contiguous, so that
any two sites within it can be cleaved simultaneously
without excising vector sequences.
The pUC vectors also incorporate a DNA sequence
that permits rapid visual detection of an insert. The
MCS is inserted into the lacZ′ sequence, which encodes
the promoter and the α-peptide of β-galactosidase.
The insertion of the MCS into the lacZ′ fragment does
not affect the ability of the α-peptide to mediate complementation, but cloning DNA fragments into the
MCS does. Therefore, recombinants can be detected
by blue/white screening on growth medium containing Xgal (see Box 3.2 on p. 45). The usual site for
insertion of the MCS is between the initiator ATG
codon and codon 7, a region that encodes a functionally non-essential part of the α-complementation
peptide. Slilaty and Lebel (1998) have reported that
blue/white color selection can be variable. They
have found that reliable inactivation of complementation occurs only when the insert is made between
codons 11 and 36.

beginnings of gene manipulation, it should have been
investigated and developed as a vector. The DNA of
phage λ, in the form in which it is isolated from
the phage particle, is a linear duplex molecule of
about 48.5 kbp. The entire DNA sequence has been
determined (Sanger et al. 1982). At each end are
short single-stranded 5′ projections of 12 nucleotides,
which are complementary in sequence and by which
the DNA adopts a circular structure when it is injected
into its host cell, i.e. λ DNA naturally has cohesive
termini, which associate to form the cos site.
Functionally related genes of phage λ are clustered together on the map, except for the two positive
regulatory genes N and Q. Genes on the left of the
conventional linear map (Fig. 4.10) code for head
and tail proteins of the phage particle. Genes of the
central region are concerned with recombination
(e.g. red) and the process of lysogenization, in which
the circularized chromosome is inserted into its host
chromosome and stably replicated along with it as
a prophage. Much of this central region, including
these genes, is not essential for phage growth and
can be deleted or replaced without seriously impairing the infectious growth cycle. Its dispensability is
crucially important, as will become apparent later,
in the construction of vector derivatives of the phage.
To the right of the central region are genes concerned with regulation and prophage immunity to
superinfection (N, cro, cI), followed by DNA synthesis
(O, P), late function regulation (Q), and host cell lysis
(S, R). Figure 4.11 illustrates the λ life cycle.

Bacteriophage l
The genetic organization of bacteriophage l
favors its subjugation as a vector

Bacteriophage l has sophisticated
control circuits

Bacteriophage λ is a genetically complex but very
extensively studied virus of E. coli (Box 4.2). Because
it has been the object of so much research in molecular genetics, it was natural that, right from the

Head
Left
cohesive
end
%λ 1

Tail

AWB DEFZ
10

Int
rec egrat
om ion
bin an
atio d
Reg
n
im ulati
mu on
nit
a
nd
y
DN
As
Lat
y
e fu
n
nct thesis
Ho ion r
e
st l
ysi gula
tio
s

b2
reg
ion

n

As we shall see, it is possible to insert foreign DNA
into the chromosome of phage-λ derivative and, in

20

xis
cro
att int red N cI
OP Q SR
gam

J
30

40

50

60

Non-essential region

70

80

90

Right
cohesive
end

100 %λ

Fig. 4.10 Map of the λ chromosome,
showing the physical position of some
genes on the full-length DNA of wild-type
bacteriophage λ. Clusters of functionally
related genes are indicated.

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

67

Box 4.2 Bacteriophage l: its important place in molecular biology
and recombinant DNA technology
DNA

Head
proteins

Tail proteins

In the early 1950s, following some initial
studies on Bacillus megaterium, André Lwoff
and his colleagues at the Institut Pasteur
described the phenomenon of lysogeny in
E. coli. It became clear that certain strains of
E. coli were lysogenized by phage, that is to
say, these bacteria harbored phage l in a
dormant form, called a prophage. The
lysogenic bacteria grew normally and might
easily not have been recognized as lysogenic.
However, when Lwoff exposed the bacteria
to a moderate dose of ultraviolet light, the
bacteria stopped growing, and after about
90 min of incubation the bacteria lysed,
releasing a crop of phage into the medium.
The released phage were incapable of
infecting more E. coli that had been
lysogenized by phage l (this is called
immunity to superinfection), but nonlysogenic bacteria could be infected to yield
another crop of virus. Not every non-lysogenic
bacterium yielded virus; some bacteria were

some cases, foreign genes can be expressed efficiently
via λ promoters. We must therefore briefly consider
the promoters and control circuits affecting λ gene
expression (see Ptashne (1992) for an excellent
monograph on phage-λ control circuits).

converted into lysogens because the phage
switched to the dormant lifestyle – becoming
prophage – rather than causing a lytic
infection.
By the mid-1950s it was realized that the
prophage consisted of a phage l genome
that had become integrated into the E. coli
chromosome. It was also apparent to Lwoff’s
colleagues, Jacob and Monod, that the
switching between the two states of the
virus – the lytic and lysogenic lifestyles –
was an example of a fundamental aspect
of genetics that was gaining increasing
attention, gene regulation.
Intensive genetic and molecular biological
analysis of the phage, mainly in the 1960s
and 1970s, led to a good understanding of
the virus. The key molecule in maintaining the
dormancy of the prophage and in conferring
immunity to superinfection is the phage
repressor, which is the product of the phage
cI gene. In 1967 the phage repressor was
isolated by Mark Ptashne (Ptashne 1967a,b).
The advanced molecular genetics of the phage
made it a good candidate for development
as a vector, beginning in the 1970s and
continuing to the present day, as described
in the text. The development of vectors
exploited the fact that a considerable portion
of the phage genome encodes functions that
are not needed for the infectious cycle. The
ability to package recombinant phage DNA
into virus particles in vitro was an important
development for library construction (Hohn
& Murray 1977).
A landmark in molecular biology was
reached when the entire sequence of the
phage l genome, 48,502 nucleotide pairs,
was determined by Fred Sanger and his
colleagues (Sanger et al. 1982).

In the lytic cycle, λ transcription occurs in three
temporal stages: early, middle, and late. Basically,
early gene transcription establishes the lytic cycle
(in competition with lysogeny), middle gene products replicate and recombine the DNA, and late gene

68

CHAPTER 4

Absorption
R
A
A

Cell envelope

Host lysis

R

Addition of
phage tails

A
Cleavage

Nicks sealed
by ligase

cos

cos
cos

R
Early
replication
(bidirectional
mode)

A
Lysogeny

cos
R

A

Origin

cos
R

cos

gal
Recombination

att
x

att
E.coli chromosome

cos

Integration
Late replication
(rolling circle mode)

bio

gal

N

R cos A

att

Excision
J

bio
att

Replication along with
E.coli chromosome

products package this DNA into mature phage particles. Following infection of a sensitive host, early
transcription proceeds from major promoters situated immediately to the left (PL) and right (PR) of the
repressor gene (cI) (Fig. 4.12). This transcription
is subject to repression by the product of the cI
gene and in a lysogen this repression is the basis of
immunity to superinfecting λ. Early in infection,
transcripts from PL and PR stop at termination sites tL
and tR1. The site tR2 stops any transcripts that escape
beyond tR1. Lambda switches from early- to middlestage transcription by anti-termination. The N gene
product, expressed from PL, directs this switch. It
interacts with RNA polymerase and, antagonizing
the action of host termination protein ρ, permits it to
ignore the stop signals so that PL and PR transcripts
extend into genes such as red, O, and P necessary for
the middle stage. The early and middle transcripts
and patterns of expression therefore overlap. The cro
product, when sufficient has accumulated, prevents
transcription from PL and PR. The gene Q is expressed
from the distal portion of the extended PR transcript
and is responsible for the middle-to-late switch. This

Fig. 4.11 Replication of phage-λ DNA in
lytic and lysogenic cycles.

PL PR
tL
N

tR1

cl
O

red

tR2

P

int

Q

P′R

S
R
cos
J

A
Z F

Legend
Early transcripts
Middle transcripts
Late transcripts

Fig. 4.12 Major promoters and transcriptional termination
sites of phage λ. (See text for details.)

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

also operates by anti-termination. The Q product
specifically anti-terminates the short PR transcript,
extending it into the late genes, across the cohered
cos region, so that many mature phage particles are
ultimately produced.
Both N and Q play positive regulatory roles essential for phage growth and plaque formation; but an
N − phage can produce a small plaque if the termination site tR2 is removed by a small deletion termed nin
(N-independent) as in λN − nin.

A number of phage l vectors with improved
properties have been described

There are two basic types of phage l vectors:
insertional vectors and replacement
vectors

•

Wild-type λ DNA contains several target sites for most
of the commonly used restriction endonucleases and
so is not itself suitable as a vector. Derivatives of the
wild-type phage have therefore been produced that
either have a single target site at which foreign DNA
can be inserted (insertional vectors) or have a pair
of sites defining a fragment that can be removed
(stuffer) and replaced by foreign DNA (replacement
vectors). Since phage λ can accommodate only
about 5% more than its normal complement of
DNA, vector derivatives are constructed with deletions to increase the space within the genome. The
shortest λ DNA molecules that produce plaques of
nearly normal size are 25% deleted. Apparently, if
too much non-essential DNA is deleted from the
genome, it cannot be packaged into phage particles
efficiently. This can be turned to advantage for, if the
replaceable fragment of a replacement-type vector is
either removed by physical separation or effectively
destroyed by treatment with a second restriction
endonuclease that cuts it alone, then the deleted
vector genome can give rise to plaques only if a new
DNA segment is inserted into it. This amounts to
positive selection for recombinant phage carrying
foreign DNA.
Many vector derivatives of both the insertional
and replacement types were produced by several
groups of researchers early in the development of
recombinant DNA technology (e.g. Thomas et al.
1974, Murray & Murray 1975, Blattner et al. 1977,
Leder et al. 1977). Most of these vectors were constructed for use with EcoRI, BamHI, or HindIII, but
their application could be extended to other endonucleases by the use of linker molecules. These early
vectors have been largely superseded by improved vectors for rapid and efficient genomic or complementary DNA (cDNA) library construction (see Chapter 6).

69

As with plasmid vectors, improved phage-vector
derivatives have been developed. There have been
several aims, among which are the following.
•

•

•

To increase the capacity for foreign DNA fragments, preferably for fragments generated by any
one of several restriction enzymes (reviewed by
Murray 1983).
To devise methods for positively selecting recombinant formation.
To allow RNA probes to be conveniently prepared
by transcription of the foreign DNA insert; this
facilitates the screening of libraries in chromosome walking procedures. An example of a vector
with this property is λZAP (see p. 104).
To develop vectors for the insertion of eukaryotic
cDNA (p. 104) such that expression of the cDNA,
in the form of a fusion polypeptide with βgalactosidase, is driven in E. coli; this form of
expression vector is useful in antibody screening.
An example of such a vector is λgt11.

The first two points will be discussed here. The discussion of improved vectors in library construction
and screening is deferred until Chapter 6.
The maximum capacity of phage-λ derivatives
can only be attained with vectors of the replacement
type, so that there has also been an accompanying
incentive to devise methods for positively selecting
recombinant formation without the need for prior
removal of the stuffer fragment. Even when steps are
taken to remove the stuffer fragment by physical purification of vector arms, small contaminating amounts
may remain, so that genetic selection for recombinant
formation remains desirable. The usual method of
achieving this is to exploit the Spi− phenotype.
Wild-type λ cannot grow on E. coli strains lysogenic for phage P2; in other words, the λ phage is
Spi+ (sensitive to P2 inhibition). It has been shown
that the products of λ genes red and gam, which lie in
the region 64–69% on the physical map, are responsible for the inhibition of growth in a P2 lysogen
(Herskowitz 1974, Sprague et al. 1978, Murray
1983). Hence vectors have been derived in which
the stuffer fragment includes the region 64–69%, so
that recombinants in which this has been replaced
by foreign DNA are phenotypically Spi− and can be
positively selected by plating on a P2 lysogen (Karn
et al. 1984, Loenen & Brammar 1980).

70

CHAPTER 4

left arm
(20 kb)

EcoRI
BamHI
SalI

SalI
BamHI
EcoRI

Deletion of the gam gene has other consequences.
The gam product is necessary for the normal switch
in λ DNA replication from the bidirectional mode
to the rolling-circle mode (see Fig. 4.11). Gam−
phage cannot generate the concatemeric linear DNA
which is normally the substrate for packaging into
phage heads. However, gam− phage do form plaques
because the rec and red recombination systems act
on circular DNA molecules to form multimers,
which can be packaged. gam− red − phage are totally
dependent upon rec-mediated exchange for plaque
formation on rec+ bacteria. λ DNA is a poor substrate
for this rec-mediated exchange. Therefore, such phage
make vanishingly small plaques unless they contain
one or more short DNA sequences called chi (crossover hot-spot instigator) sites, which stimulate recmediated exchange. Many of the current replacement
vectors generate red − gam− clones and so have been
constructed with a chi site within the non-replaceable part of the phage.
The most recent generation of λ vectors, which
are based on EMBL3 and EMBL4 (Frischauf et al.
1983; Fig. 4.13), have a capacity for DNA of size
9–23 kb. As well as being chi+, they have polylinkers
flanking the stuffer fragment to facilitate library
construction. Phages with inserts can be selected on
the basis of their Spi− phenotype, but there is an alternative. The vector can be digested with BamHI and
EcoRI prior to ligation with foreign DNA fragments
produced with BamHI. If the small BamHI–EcoRI
fragments from the polylinkers are removed, the
stuffer fragment will not be reincorporated.

central stuffer
(14 kb)

right arm
(9 kb)

left arm
(20 kb)

Sal I
BamHI
EcoRI

EcoRI
BamHI
Sal I

EMBL3 vector

central stuffer
(14 kb)

right arm
(9 kb)

EMBL4 vector
5′. . . GGATC TGGGT CGACG GATCC GGGGA ATTCC CAGAT CC . . .3′
Sal I

BamHI

EcoRI

Fig. 4.13 The structure of bacteriophage λ cloning vectors
EMBL3 and EMBL4. The polylinker sequence is present in
opposite orientation in the two vectors.

By packaging DNA into phage l in vitro it is
possible to eliminate the need for competent
cells of E. coli
So far, we have considered only one way of introducing manipulated phage DNA into the host
bacterium, i.e. by transfection of competent bacteria
(see Chapter 2). Transfection is the introduction of
naked phage DNA into a bacterial cell. Using freshly
prepared λ DNA that has not been subjected to any
gene-manipulation procedures, transfection will
result typically in about 105 plaques/µg of DNA.
In a gene-manipulation experiment in which the
vector DNA is restricted and then ligated with foreign DNA, this figure is reduced to about 104–103
plaques/µg of vector DNA. Even with perfectly
efficient nucleic acid biochemistry, some of this
reduction is inevitable. It is a consequence of the
random association of fragments in the ligation
reaction, which produces molecules with a variety of
fragment combinations, many of which are inviable.
Yet, in some contexts, 106 or more recombinants are
required. The scale of such experiments can be kept
within a reasonable limit by packaging the recombinant DNA into mature phage particles in vitro.
Placing the recombinant DNA in a phage coat
allows it to be introduced into the host bacteria by
the normal processes of phage infection, i.e. phage
adsorption followed by DNA injection. This is known
as transduction. Depending upon the details of the
experimental design, packaging in vitro yields about
106 plaques/µg of vector DNA after the ligation
reaction.
Figure 4.14 shows some of the events occurring
during the packaging process that take place within
the host during normal phage growth and which we
now require to perform in vitro. Phage DNA in concatemeric form, produced by a rolling-circle replication mechanism (see Fig. 4.11), is the substrate for
the packaging reaction. In the presence of phage
head precursor (the product of gene E is the major
capsid protein) and the product of gene A, the concatemeric DNA is cleaved into monomers and encapsidated. Nicks are introduced in opposite strands of
the DNA, 12 nucleotide pairs apart at each cos site,
to produce the linear monomer with its cohesive
termini. The product of gene D is then incorporated
into what now becomes a completed phage head.
The products of genes W and FII, among others, then
unite the head with a separately assembled tail structure to form the mature particle.
The principle of packaging in vitro is to supply the
ligated recombinant DNA with high concentrations

71

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

Head precursor
Phage genes

Phage genes

Major capsid protein
is product of gene E
Assembly
proteins

Assembly
proteins

Induced λ lysogen E.coli
BHB2688 E amber mutation.
Produces λ tails, protein D,
assembly proteins, but no
protein E and hence no
pre-heads

Induced λ lysogen E.coli
BHB2690 D amber mutation.
Produces λ tails, pre-heads
including protein E, assembly
proteins, but DNA packaging
blocked by lack of protein D

pD
Concatemeric DNA

cos

Product of gene D
included in capsid

cos
cos

Endonucleolytic cleavage by
product of gene A at cos sites.
At each cos site nicks are
introduced 12 bp apart on
opposite strands of the DNA,
hence generating the cohesive
termini of λDNA as it is found
in the phage particle. ATP is
required for this process

Lyse, mix
Add ATP and
concatemerized λDNA
cos

Assembly proteins,
products of genes W, FII plus
completed tails
Mature particle

cos

+

cos

+

Assembly
proteins

cos

+

pD

Fig. 4.14 Simplified scheme showing packaging of phage-λ
DNA into phage particles.
Mature phage
particles

of phage-head precursor, packaging proteins, and
phage tails. Practically, this is most efficiently performed in a very concentrated mixed lysate of two
induced lysogens, one of which is blocked at the
pre-head stage by an amber mutation in gene D and
therefore accumulates this precursor, while the other
is prevented from forming any head structure by an
amber mutation in gene E (Hohn & Murray 1977).
In the mixed lysate, genetic complementation occurs
and exogenous DNA is packaged (Fig. 4.15). Although
concatemeric DNA is the substrate for packaging
(covalently joined concatemers are, of course, produced in the ligation reaction by association of the
natural cohesive ends of λ), the in vitro system will
package added monomeric DNA, which presumably
first concatemerizes non-covalently.
There are two potential problems associated with
packaging in vitro. First, endogenous DNA derived
from the induced prophages of the lysogens used to
prepare the packaging lysate can itself be packaged.
This can be overcome by choosing the appropriate
genotype for these prophages, i.e. excision upon
induction is inhibited by the b2 deletion (Gottesmann
& Yarmolinsky 1968) and imm 434 immunity will
prevent plaque formation if an imm 434 lysogenic
bacterium is used for plating the complex reaction
mixture. Additionally, if the vector does not contain

Fig. 4.15 In vitro packaging of concatemerized phage-λ
DNA in a mixed lysate.

any amber mutation a non-suppressing host bacterium can be used so that endogenous DNA will not
give rise to plaques. The second potential problem
arises from recombination in the lysate between
exogenous DNA and induced prophage markers.
If troublesome, this can be overcome by using
recombination-deficient (i.e. red − rec−) lysogens and
by UV-irradiating the cells used to prepare the lysate,
so eliminating the biological activity of the endogenous DNA (Hohn & Murray 1977).

DNA cloning with single-stranded
DNA vectors
M13, f1, and fd are filamentous coliphages containing a circular single-stranded DNA molecule. These
coliphages have been developed as cloning vectors, for
they have a number of advantages over other vectors,
including the other two classes of vector for E. coli:
plasmids and phage λ. However, in order to appreciate their advantages, it is essential to have a basic
understanding of the biology of filamentous phages.

72

CHAPTER 4

Filamentous bacteriophages have a number
of unique properties that make them suitable
as vectors
The phage particles have dimensions 900 nm × 9 nm
and contain a single-stranded circular DNA molecule,
which is 6407 (M13) or 6408 (fd) nucleotides long.
The complete nucleotide sequences of fd and M13
are available and they are 97% identical. The differences consist mainly of isolated nucleotides here and
there, mostly affecting the redundant bases of codons,
with no blocks of sequence divergence.
The filamentous phages only infect strains of
enteric bacteria harboring F pili. The adsorption site
appears to be the end of the F pilus, but exactly how
the phage genome gets from the end of the F pilus to
the inside of the cell is not known. Replication of
phage DNA does not result in host-cell lysis. Rather,
infected cells continue to grow and divide, albeit at
a slower rate than uninfected cells, and extrude
virus particles. Up to 1000 phage particles may be
released into the medium per cell per generation
(Fig. 4.16).
The single-stranded phage DNA enters the cell
by a process in which decapsidation and replication
are tightly coupled. The capsid proteins enter the
cytoplasmic membrane as the viral DNA passes into
the cell while being converted to a double-stranded
replicative form (RF). The RF multiplies rapidly until
about 100 RF molecules are formed inside the cell.
Replication of the RF then becomes asymmetric,
due to the accumulation of a viral-encoded singlestranded specific DNA-binding protein. This protein
binds to the viral strand and prevents synthesis of the
complementary strand. From this point on, only
viral single strands are synthesized. These progeny
single strands are released from the cell as filamentous particles following morphogenesis at the cell
membrane. As the DNA passes through the membrane, the DNA-binding protein is stripped off and
replaced with capsid protein.
Vectors with single-stranded DNA genomes
have specialist uses
Single-stranded DNA is required for several applications of cloned DNA. Sequencing by the original
dideoxy method required single-stranded DNA, as
do techniques for oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis and certain methods of probe preparation.
The use of vectors that occur in single-stranded form
is an attractive means of combining the cloning,

amplification, and strand separation of an originally
double-stranded DNA fragment.
As single-stranded vectors, the filamentous phages
have a number of advantages. First, the phage DNA
is replicated via a double-stranded circular DNA (RF)
intermediate. This RF can be purified and manipulated in vitro just like a plasmid. Secondly, both RF
and single-stranded DNA will transfect competent
E. coli cells to yield either plaques or infected colonies,
depending on the assay method. Thirdly, the size of
the phage particle is governed by the size of the viral
DNA and therefore there are no packaging constraints. Indeed, viral DNA up to six times the length
of M13 DNA has been packaged (Messing et al. 1981).
Finally, with these phages it is very easy to determine
the orientation of an insert. Although the relative
orientation can be determined from restriction
analysis of RF, there is an easier method (Barnes
1980). If two clones carry the insert in opposite
directions, the single-stranded DNA from them will
hybridize and this can be detected by agarose gel
electrophoresis. Phage from as little as 0.1 ml of
culture can be used in assays of this sort, making
mass screening of cultures very easy.
In summary, as vectors, filamentous phages possess all the advantages of plasmids while producing
particles containing single-stranded DNA in an
easily obtainable form.
Phage M13 has been modified to make it
a better vector
Unlike λ, the filamentous coliphages do not have any
non-essential genes which can be used as cloning
sites. However, in M13 there is a 507 bp intergenic
region, from position 5498 to 6005 of the DNA
sequence, which contains the origins of DNA replication for both the viral and the complementary
strands. In most of the vectors developed so far,
foreign DNA has been inserted at this site, although
it is possible to clone at the carboxy-terminal end of
gene IV (Boeke et al. 1979). The wild-type phages are
not very promising as vectors because they contain
very few unique sites within the intergenic region:
AsuI in the case of fd, and AsuI and AvaI in the case
of M13.
The first example of M13 cloning made use of
one of 10 BsuI sites in the genome, two of which are
in the intergenic region (Messing et al. 1977). For
cloning, M13 RF was partially digested with BsuI
and linear full-length molecules isolated by agarose
gel electrophoresis. These linear monomers were

73

Basic biology of plasmid and phage vectors

Gene 8 protein

F pilus of F+ E.coli
Gene 3 protein
M13 filamentous phage particle
(870 × 6 nm). Single-stranded DNA
circle of 6407 nucleotides

5

(+)

2

RNA pol

4

3
DNA polIII

Nicking by gene
2 protein
5

6

Stage 1
Absorption and
conversion of
single-stranded
DNA to doublestranded
(replicative form,
RF) DNA
0–1 minute
post-infection

Stage 2
RF → RF rolling
circle replication
∼20 minutes
post-infection

8

(+)

7
Cutting by
gene 2 protein

Gene 5 protein

(+)

Fig. 4.16 Life cycle
and DNA replication of
phage M13.

blunt-end-ligated to a HindII restriction fragment
comprising the E. coli lac regulatory region and
the genetic information for the α-peptide of βgalactosidase. The complete ligation mixture was
used to transform a strain of E. coli with a deletion of
the β-galactosidase α-fragment and recombinant
phage detected by intragenic complementation on
media containing IPTG and Xgal (see Box 3.2 on
p. 45). One of the blue plaques was selected and the
virus in it designated M13 mp1.
Insertion of DNA fragments into the lac region of
M13 mp1 destroys its ability to form blue plaques,
making detection of recombinants easy. However,

Stage 3
Gene 5 protein
switches DNA
synthesis to
production of
single strands
∼20 minutes
post-infection
to indefinitely

Virus particles extruded from
infected cell without lysis

the lac region only contains unique sites for AvaII,
BglI, and PvuI and three sites for PvuII, and there are
no sites anywhere on the complete genome for the
commonly used enzymes such as EcoRI or HindIII.
To remedy this defect, Gronenborn and Messing
(1978) used in vitro mutagenesis to change a single
base pair, thereby creating a unique EcoRI site within
the lac fragment. This variant was designated M13
mp2. This phage derivative was further modified
to generate derivatives with polylinkers upstream
of the lac α-fragment (Fig. 4.17). These derivatives
(mp7–mp11, mp18, mp19) are the exact M13 counterparts of the pUC plasmids shown in Fig. 4.9.

74

CHAPTER 4

Xmn I 357
X

BsrG I 1020
BsaB I 1148
SnaB I 1267
BspH I 1298

i

Cla I–BspD I 6881
Swa I 6782
Acl I 6772
Bpm I 6904
Dsa I 6616
BsmF I 6528
Bgl II 6934
Bsu36 I 6507
Bpm I 6492
Msl I 6996
Bgl I 6431
Fsp I 6425
Polylinker
Pvu I 6405
cloning sites
II
Ear I 6390
6229–6287
Z
BsaH I 6000
c
La
Sfo I–Nar I–Kas I 6000
BsmB I 5970
Ava II 5914
BsoB I–Ava I 5824
Drd I 5758
Dra III 5715
Plus
Ban II 5642
ORI
Nae I–NgoM IV 5612
Minus
BsrF I 5612
La
c

I
VI

V

VII

IX

I

IV

Bsm I 1745

BsmF I 5089

BseR I 2007

III

Msc I 5079

AlwN I 2186

VI

Cla I–BspD I 2526
Xmn I 2645
Dsa I 2762

Acl I 4633
I

Msl I 2795

Pac I 4131
BsaB I 3973
Ear I 4073

Eco47 III 3038

MET THR MET ILE THR ASN Ser Ser Ser Val Pro Gly Asp Pro Leu Glu Ser Thr Cys Arg His Ala Ser Leu ALA → LacZ´

6230
Ecl136 II
Sac I

6250
Xma I
Sma I

6270
Xba I

Pst I

6290
Hind III

atgaccatgattacgaattCGAGCTCGGTACCCGGGGATCCTCTAGAGTCGACCTGCAGGCATGCAAGCTTGGcact
EcoR I
Kpn I
BamH I
Sal I
Sph I
Acc65 I
Hinc II
Acc I
Ava I/BsoB I

Fig. 4.17 Restriction map of cloning vector M13mp18. Phages M13mp18 and M13mp19 are 7249 bases in length and differ
only in the orientation of the 54-base polylinker that they carry. The map shows the restriction sites of enzymes that cut the
molecule once or twice. The unique sites are shown in bold type.

Suggested reading
Balbas P. & Bolivar F. (2004) Back to basics: PBR322
and protein expression on systems in E. coli. Methods
in Molecular Biology 267, 77–90.
Christensen A.C. (2001) Bacteriophage lambda-based
expression vectors. Molecular Biotechnology 17, 219–
24.
A short review that covers much of the same ground as
discussed in this book.

Grabherr R. & Bayer K. (2002) Impact of targeted
vector design on ColE1 plasmid replication. Trends in
Biotechnology 20, 257–60.
Most of the vectors used in E. coli are derived from plasmid
ColE1 and this review discusses the factors that influence
the plasmid copy number.
Stadler J., Lemmens R. & Nyhammar T. (2004) Plasmid
DNA purification. Journal of Gene Medicine 6, Supplement 1, 554–66.
This review discusses plasmid purification from the
perspective of large-scale manufacture for gene therapy
purposes.

CHAPTER 5
Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

Introduction
In the 1970s, when recombinant DNA technology
was first being developed, only a limited number of
vectors were available and these were based on
either high-copy-number plasmids or phage λ. Later,
phage M13 was developed as a specialist vector
to facilitate DNA sequencing. Gradually, a number
of purpose-built vectors were developed, of which
pBR322 is probably the best example, but the creation of each one was a major task. Over time, a
series of specialist vectors was constructed, each for
a particular purpose. During this period, there were
many arguments about the relative benefits of
plasmid and phage vectors. Today, the molecular
biologist has available an enormous range of vectors
and these are notable for three reasons. First, many
of them combine elements from both plasmids and
phages and are known as phasmids or, if they contain
an M13 ori region, phagemids. One group of phasmids that is widely used is the λZAP series of vectors
used for cDNA cloning and these are described on
p. 104. Secondly, many different features that facilitate cloning and expression can be found combined
in a single vector. Thirdly, purified vector DNA plus
associated reagents can be purchased from molecularbiology suppliers. The hapless scientist who opens a
molecular-biology catalog is faced with a bewildering selection of vectors and each vender promotes
different ones. Although the benefits of using each
vector may be clear, the disadvantages are seldom
obvious. The aim of this chapter is to provide the
reader with a detailed explanation of the biological
basis for the different designs of vector.
There are two general uses for cloning vectors:
cloning large pieces of DNA and manipulating genes.
When mapping and sequencing genomes, the first
step is to subdivide the genome into manageable pieces.
The larger these pieces, the easier it is to construct the
final picture (see Chapter 17); hence the need to
clone large fragments of DNA. Large fragments are

also needed if it is necessary to “walk” along the
genome to isolate a gene, and this topic is covered in
Chapter 6. In many instances, the desired gene will
be relatively easy to isolate and a simpler cloning
vector can be used. Once isolated, the cloned gene
may be expressed as a probe sequence or as a protein,
it may be sequenced or it may be mutated in vitro. For
all these applications, small specialist vectors are used.

Vectors for cloning large fragments of DNA
Cosmids are plasmids that can be packaged
into bacteriophage l particles
As we have seen, concatemers of unit-length λ DNA
molecules can be efficiently packaged if the cos sites,
substrates for the packaging-dependent cleavage,
are 37–52 kb apart (75–105% the size of λ+ DNA).
In fact, only a small region in the proximity of the
cos site is required for recognition by the packaging
system (Hohn 1975).
Plasmids have been constructed which contain a
fragment of λ DNA including the cos site (Collins &
Brüning 1978, Collins & Hohn 1979, Wahl et al.
1987, Evans et al. 1989). These plasmids have been
termed cosmids and can be used as gene-cloning
vectors in conjunction with the in vitro packaging
system. Figure 5.1 shows a gene-cloning scheme
employing a cosmid. Packaging the cosmid recombinants into phage coats imposes a desirable selection
upon their size. With a cosmid vector of 5 kb, we
demand the insertion of 32–47 kb of foreign DNA –
much more than a phage-λ vector can accommodate. Note that, after packaging in vitro, the particle
is used to infect a suitable host. The recombinant
cosmid DNA is injected and circularizes like phage
DNA but replicates as a normal plasmid without
the expression of any phage functions. Transformed
cells are selected on the basis of a vector drugresistance marker.

76

CHAPTER 5

Cosmid
Restriction
endonuclease
target site

ApR

Foreign DNA restriction
fragment

cos
Restriction
endonuclease

DNA ligase (high DNA concentration)

+
cos

+

+

etc.

cos

37–52 kb
Packaging
in vitro

Transducing particle
containing cosmid
recombinant

Absorption + injection

ApR

cos
Select ApR clone
DNA circularizes after
injection

Fig. 5.1 Simple scheme for cloning in a cosmid vector.
(See text for details.)

Cosmids provide an efficient means of cloning large
pieces of foreign DNA. Because of their capacity for
large fragments of DNA, cosmids are particularly
attractive vectors for constructing libraries of eukaryotic genome fragments. Partial digestion with a
restriction endonuclease provides suitably large
fragments. However, there is a potential problem
associated with the use of partial digests in this way.
This is due to the possibility of two or more genome
fragments joining together in the ligation reaction,
hence creating a clone containing fragments that
were not initially adjacent in the genome. This would
give an incorrect picture of their chromosomal organ-

ization. The problem can be overcome by size fractionation of the partial digest.
Even with sized foreign DNA, it is possible for
cosmid clones to be produced that contain noncontiguous DNA fragments ligated to form a single
insert. The problem can be solved by dephosphorylating the foreign DNA fragments so as to prevent
their ligation together. This method is very sensitive
to the exact ratio of target-to-vector DNAs (Collins &
Brüning 1978) because vector-to-vector ligation
can occur. Furthermore, recombinants with a duplicated vector are unstable and break down in the host
by recombination, resulting in the propagation of a
non-recombinant cosmid vector.
Such difficulties have been overcome in a cosmidcloning procedure devised by Ish-Horowicz and
Burke (1981). By appropriate treatment of the cosmid vector pJB8 (Fig. 5.2), left-hand and right-hand
vector ends are purified which are incapable of selfligation but which accept dephosphorylated foreign
DNA. Thus the method eliminates the need to size
the foreign DNA fragments and prevents formation
of clones containing short foreign DNA or multiple
vector sequences.
An alternative solution to these problems has
been devised by Bates and Swift (1983) who have
constructed cosmid c2XB. This cosmid carries a
BamHI insertion site and two cos sites separated by a
blunt-end restriction site (Fig. 5.3). The creation of
these blunt ends, which ligate only very inefficiently
under the conditions used, effectively prevents vector self-ligation in the ligation reaction.
Modern cosmids of the pWE and sCos series (Wahl
et al. 1987, Evans et al. 1989) contain features such
as: (i) multiple cloning sites (Bates & Swift 1983,
Pirrotta et al. 1983, Breter et al. 1987) for simple
cloning using non-size-selected DNA; (ii) phage
promoters flanking the cloning site; and (iii) unique
NotI, SacII, or Sfil sites (rare cutters, see Chapter 17)
flanking the cloning site to permit removal of the
insert from the vector as single fragments. Mammalian
expression modules encoding dominant selectable
markers (Chapter 12) may also be present, for gene
transfer to mammalian cells if required.
BACs and PACs are vectors that can carry
much larger fragments of DNA than cosmids
because they do not have packaging
constraints
Phage P1 is a temperate bacteriophage which has
been extensively used for genetic analysis of Escherichia

77

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

(a)

BamHI HindIII
PstI

ApR

EcoRI

EcoRI

pJB8
(5.4 kb)

cos

SalI

(b)

BamHI HindIII

Target genomic
DNA

cos
SalI

(1) Hind III
(2) Phosphatase
H
HO
cos

H
OH

S
HO
B

B

BamHI
H
HO

Fig. 5.2 Cosmidcloning scheme of
Ish-Horowicz and
Burke (1981). (a)
Map of cosmid pJB8.
(b) Application to the
construction of a
genomic library of
fragments obtained by
partial digestion with
Sau3A. This restriction
endonuclease has a
tetranucleotide
recognition site and
generates fragments
with the same cohesive
termini as BamHI.

(1) SalI
(2) Phosphatase
S
OH
cos

(1) Partial
Sau3A
digestion

BamHI
B

cos

S
BH
OH HO

B B

S
OH

cos

(2) Phosphatase

Sau3A
Mix
Ligate

Sau3A

HO

OH
32–47 kb

H
HO

(B)

(B)

cos

S
cos

OH

37–52 kb
Only packageable molecules

Package
in vitro

coli because it can mediate generalized transduction.
Sternberg and co-workers have developed a P1 vector system which has a capacity for DNA fragments
as large as 100 kb (Sternberg 1990, Pierce et al.
1992). Thus the capacity is about twice that of
cosmid clones but less than that of yeast artificial
chromosome (YAC) clones (see p. 213). The P1 vector contains a packaging site (pac) which is necessary
for in vitro packaging of recombinant molecules into
phage particles. The vectors contain two loxP sites.
These are the sites recognized by the phage recombinase, the product of the phage cre gene, and which
lead to circularization of the packaged DNA after
it has been injected into an E. coli host expressing
the recombinase (Fig. 5.4). Clones are maintained in
E. coli as low-copy-number plasmids by selection for

a vector kanamycin-resistance marker. A high copy
number can be induced by exploitation of the P1
lytic replicon (Sternberg 1990). This P1 system has
been used to construct genomic libraries of mouse,
human, fission yeast, and Drosophila DNA (Hoheisel
et al. 1993, Hartl et al. 1994).
Shizuya et al. (1992) have developed a bacterial
cloning system for mapping and analysis of complex genomes. This BAC system (bacterial artificial
chromosome) is based on the single-copy sex factor
F of E. coli. This vector (Fig. 5.5) includes the λ cos
N and P1 loxP sites, two cloning sites (HindIII and
BamHI), and several G+C restriction enzyme sites (e.g.
SfiI, NotI, etc.) for potential excision of the inserts.
The cloning site is also flanked by T7 and SP6 promoters for generating RNA probes. This BAC can be

78

CHAPTER 5

ApR

cos
c2XB
(6.8 kb)

KmR
SmaI
cos

rep
BamHI

Target genomic
DNA
SmaI
(Blunt)

BamHI BamHI
cos

ApR rep

SmaI
(Blunt)
cos

(1) Partial Sau3AI digestion
(2) Phosphatase
Sau3AI

Sau3AI
Mix
Ligate
32–45 kb

SmaI
(Blunt)

(B)
cos

(B)

R

Ap rep

37–52 kb

Only packageable molecules

Package
in vitro

transformed into E. coli very efficiently, thus avoiding
the packaging extracts that are required with the
P1 system. BACs are capable of maintaining human
and plant genomic fragments of greater than 300 kb
for over 100 generations with a high degree of stability (Woo et al. 1994) and have been used to construct genome libraries with an average insert size of
125 kb (Wang et al. 1995a). Subsequently, Ioannou
et al. (1994) have developed a P1-derived artificial
chromosome (PAC), by combining features of both
the P1 and the F-factor systems. Such PAC vectors
are able to handle inserts in the 100–300 kb range.
The first BAC vector, pBAC108L, lacked a selectable marker for recombinants. Thus, clones with
inserts had to be identified by colony hybridization.
While this once was standard practice in gene manipulation work, today it is considered to be inconvenient! Two widely used BAC vectors, pBeloBAC11
and pECBAC1, are derivatives of pBAC108L in which
the original cloning site is replaced with a lacZ gene

cos

SmaI
(Blunt)

Fig. 5.3 Cosmidcloning scheme of
Bates and Swift (1983).
The cosmid c2XB
contains two cos sites,
separated by a site for
the restriction
endonuclease SmaI
which creates blunt
ends. These blunt
ends ligate only very
inefficiently under the
conditions used and
effectively prevent
the formation of
recombinants
containing multiple
copies of the vector.

carrying a multiple cloning site (Kim et al. 1996,
Frijters et al. 1997). pBeloBAC11 has two EcoRI sites,
one in the lacZ gene and one in the CMR gene, whereas
pECBAC1 has only the EcoRI site in the lacZ gene.
Further improvements to BACs have been made by
replacing the lacZ gene with the sacB gene (Hamilton
et al. 1996). Insertional inactivation of sacB permits
growth of the host cell on sucrose-containing media,
i.e. positive selection for inserts. Frengen et al. (1999)
have further improved these BACs by including a
site for the insertion of a transposon. This enables
genomic inserts to be modified after cloning in bacteria, a procedure known as retrofitting. The principal
uses of retrofitting are the simplified introduction of
deletions (Chatterjee & Coren 1997) and the introduction of reporter genes for use in the original host
of the genomic DNA (Wang et al. 2001). For example, Al-Hasani et al. (2003) and Magin-Lachmann
et al. (2003) have used retrofitting to develop BACs
that facilitate transfection, episomal maintenance,

79

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

Short arm
pac loxP

Stuffer

+

P1 and plasmid
replicons: kanr, loxP
Long arm
pac loxP

Insert DNA

Ligate
Insert DNA

P1 and plasmid
replicons: kanr, loxP Stuffer

115 kb
Pac extract cleaves at pac
site and inserts DNA into
P1 heads. Tails are attached

Fig. 5.4 The phage P1 vector system. The
P1 vector Ad10 (Sternberg 1990) is digested
to generate short and long vector arms.
These are dephosphorylated to prevent selfligation. Size-selected insert DNA (85–100
kb) is ligated with vector arms, ready for a
two-stage processing by packaging extracts.
First, the recombinant DNA is cleaved at the
pac site by pacase in the packaging extract.
Then the pacase works in concert with
head/tail extract to insert DNA into phage
heads, pac site first, cleaving off a headful of
DNA at 115 kb. Heads and tails then unite.
The resulting phage particle can inject
recombinant DNA into host E. coli. The host
is cre+. The cre recombinase acts on loxP sites
to produce a circular plasmid. The plasmid is
maintained at low copy number, but can be
amplified by inducing the P1 lytic operon.

HindIII
NotI

Allow phage to adsorb
to host strain and inject
DNA into cre + host cell
loxP

Cre recombinase protein circularizes injected DNA at the loxP sites. DNA replicates using
plasmid replicon. Plasmid copy number is increased by induction of P1 lytic replicon.

T7
promoter

IoxP
SP6 promoter

and functional analysis of large genomic fragments
in eukaryotic cells.
Recombinogenic engineering
(recombineering) simplifies the
cloning of DNA, particularly with
high-molecular-weight constructs

R

Cm

BACs and PACs are the vectors of choice if one wishes
to clone a large fragment of DNA (e.g. >100 kb). They
are especially useful for cloning complete operons

pa
rB
A
par

ori
S

cosN

+

XmaI/SmaI
NotI/BgII/SfiI

BamHI

EagI

P1 heads
and tails

repE

Fig. 5.5 (left) Structure of a BAC vector derived from a miniF plasmid. The oriS and repE genes mediate the unidirectional
replication of the F factor, while parA and parB maintain the
copy number at a level of one or two per genome. CmR is a
chloramphenicol-resistance marker. cosN and loxP are the
cleavage sites for λ terminase and P1 cre protein, respectively.
HindIII and BamHI are unique cleavage sites for inserting
foreign DNA. (Adapted from Shizuya et al. 1992.)

80

CHAPTER 5

or very large gene clusters. However, subsequent
engineering of clones is very difficult and there are
two reasons for this. First, very large plasmids are
difficult to manipulate in vitro without shearing
occurring and, even if they can be kept intact, they
have very restricted mobility in gel electrophoresis
systems. Second, the longer the DNA insert the more
likely it is to have multiple sites for each of the common restriction endonucleases. Thus any cleavage
and ligation reactions could reduce the size of the
DNA insert and result in scrambling of fragments. To
avoid these problems it is necessary to carry out the
manipulations in vivo instead of in vitro by making
use of homologous recombination.
Homologous recombination allows the exchange
of genetic information between two DNA molecules
in a precise, specific, and faithful manner. It occurs
through homology regions which are stretches of
DNA shared by the two molecules that recombine.
Because the sequence of the homology regions can
be chosen freely, any position on a target molecule
can be specifically altered. Because homologous
recombination is a rare event, some form of selection
is needed to identify the cells that carry the recombinant. Hence DNA engineering by homologous
recombination (recombinogenic engineering) makes
use of a selection procedure such as antibiotic resistance. If all that is desired is to delete part of a BAC or
PAC then only a single round of homologous recombination is required (Fig. 5.6a).
In many cases, the persistence of the selectable
gene at the site of recombination in the product is
undesirable and two rounds of recombinogenic engineering are required. In the first round, homologous
recombination is used to generate an initial product
by integration of the selectable gene, together with
additional functional elements, at the intended site.
In the second round, the extra functional elements
are used to remove the selectable gene, thereby generating the final product. Different kinds of functional
elements have been used, and Fig. 5.6b shows one of
these, target sites for site-specific recombinases such
as Cre or FLP (as described in Box 3.3). In this case, the
first product is exposed to the relevant site-specific
recombinase, which deletes the selectable cassette.
There are a number of ways of undertaking recombinogenic engineering (see reviews of Muyrers et al.
(2001) and Copeland et al. (2001)) but only the most
widely-used one, known as ET recombination, will
be described here. In this method recombination is
mediated by either RecE/RecT from the Rac phage or
by Redα/Redβ from phage λ. These two systems are

(a)

(b)
A

B

sm

A

B

sm

Linear DNA

Linear DNA

+

+

A

B

A

Target
molecule

B

Target
molecule

First
round

A

sm

B

A

First-round
product

sm

B

First-round
product

Deletion
of sm
through

Second
round

A

B

Recombinant
containing

Fig. 5.6 Two variations of in vivo recombinogenic
engineering. In both variations the target molecule remains
intact and could be a BAC, PAC, any other plasmid, or the
E. coli chromosome. (a) Replacement of a segment of a target
molecule with a linear DNA molecule that is introduced to the
host cell of the plasmid by electroporation. (b) Removal of the
selectable gene by recombination at recombinase target sites
(e.g. FRT or loxP). sm, selectable marker; arrowheads,
recombinase target sites; A and B, regions of homology.

functionally equivalent. RecE and Redα are 5′–3′
exonucleases and RecT and Redβ are DNA annealing proteins. A functional interaction between RecE
and RecT or Redα and Redβ also is required for
homologous recombination. The easiest way of supplying these recombination functions is to provide
them via plasmid-encoded genes, e.g. the pBAD-ETγ
plasmid (Zhang et al. 1998). In addition to the RecE
and RecT genes, this plasmid encodes the phage gam
gene. The benefit of this is that the gam gene product
inhibits any RecBCD-dependent destruction of the
targeting cassette.
With ET recombination, as illustrated in Fig. 5.6,
a linear targeting DNA carrying short homology
regions flanking a selectable gene is introduced by
electroporation into cells carrying the BAC or PAC

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

to be modified. The length of homology required
for efficient recombination is 35–60 nucleotides
and these can be incorporated into PCR primers
for amplification of the selectable marker (p. 9).
It should be noted that expression of the gam gene
prevents normal replication of plasmids with ColEl
replication functions. Loss of pBAD-ETγ can be prevented until after the recombinogenic engineering
step by selecting for the ampicillin resistance marker
that it also carries.
A number of factors govern the choice of
vector for cloning large fragments of DNA
The maximum size of insert that the different vectors
will accommodate is shown in Table 5.1. The size of
insert is not the only feature of importance. The
absence of chimeras and deletions is even more
important. In practice, some 50% of YACs (yeast
artificial chromosomes) show structural instability
of inserts or are chimeras in which two or more DNA
fragments have become incorporated into one clone.
These defective YACs are unsuitable for use as mapping and sequencing reagents and a great deal of
effort is required to identify them. Cosmid inserts
sometimes contain the same aberrations, and the
greatest problem with them arises when the DNA
being cloned contains tandem arrays of repeated
sequences. The problem is particularly acute when
the tandem array is several times larger than the
allowable size of a cosmid insert. Potential advantages of the BAC and PAC systems over YACs include
lower levels of chimerism (Hartl et al. 1994, Sternberg
1994), ease of library generation, and ease of manipulation and isolation of insert DNA. BAC clones seem
to represent human DNA far more faithfully than
their YAC or cosmid counterparts and appear to be
excellent substrates for shotgun sequence analysis,

Table 5.1 Maximum DNA insert possible with
different cloning vectors. YACs are discussed on p. 213.

Vector
l phage
l cosmids
P1 phage
PACs
BACs
YACs

Host

Insert size

E. coli
E. coli
E. coli
E. coli
E. coli
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae

5–25 kb
35–45 kb
70–100 kb
100–300 kb
≤300 kb
200–2000 kb

81

resulting in accurate contiguous sequence data
(Venter et al. 1998).

Specialist-purpose vectors
M13-based vectors can be used to make
single-stranded DNA suitable for sequencing
Whenever a new gene is cloned or a novel genetic
construct is made, it is usual practice to sequence all
or part of the chimeric molecule. As will be seen later
(p. 126), the Sanger method of sequencing requires
single-stranded DNA as the starting material. Originally, single-stranded DNA was obtained by cloning
the sequence of interest in an M13 vector (see p. 72).
Today, it is more usual to clone the sequence into
a pUC-based phagemid vector which contains the
M13 ori region as well as the pUC (Col E1) origin of
replication. Such vectors normally replicate inside
the cell as double-stranded molecules. Single-stranded
DNA for sequencing can be produced by infecting
cultures with a helper phage such as M13K07. This
helper phage has the origin of replication of P15A
and a kanamycin-resistance gene inserted into the
M13 ori region and carries a mutation in the gII gene
(Vieira & Messing 1987). M13K07 can replicate on
its own. However, in the presence of a phagemid
bearing a wild-type origin of replication, singlestranded phagemid is packaged preferentially and
secreted into the culture medium. DNA purified from
the phagemids can be used directly for sequencing.
Expression vectors enable a cloned gene to be
placed under the control of a promoter that
functions in E. coli
Expression vectors are required if one wants to
prepare RNA probes from the cloned gene or to
purify large amounts of the gene product. In either
case, transcription of the cloned gene is required.
Although it is possible to have the cloned gene under
the control of its own promoter, it is more usual to
utilize a promoter specific to the vector. Such vectorcarried promoters have been optimized for binding of
the E. coli RNA polymerase and many of them can be
regulated easily by changes in the growth conditions
of the host cell.
E. coli RNA polymerase is a multi-subunit enzyme.
The core enzyme consists of two identical α subunits
and one each of the β and β′ subunits. The core
enzyme is not active unless an additional subunit,

82

CHAPTER 5

-35 Region

-10 Region
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1011121314151617

CONSENSUS

• • • T TGACA • • • • • • • • •

lac

GGC T T T A C A C T T T A T G C T T C C GG C T C G T A T A T T G T

• • • • • • • •TATAAT• •
CG A A C T A G T T A A C T AG

trp

C TGT TGACA A T T A A T CA T

λPL

GTGT TGACA T A A A T ACCA

C T GG C GG T G A T A C TGA

rec A

CAC T TGA T AC TGT A TGA A

GC A T A C A G T A T A A T TG

tacI

C TGT TGACA A T T A A T CA T

CGGC T CG T A T A A TGT

tacII

C TGT TGACA A T T A A T CA T

CG A A C T A G T T T A A TGT

the σ factor, is present. RNA polymerase recognizes
different types of promoters depending on which type
of σ factor is attached. The most common promoters
are those recognized by the RNA polymerase with
σ70. A large number of σ70 promoters from E. coli have
been analyzed and a compilation of over 300 of them
can be found in Lisser and Margalit (1993). A comparison of these promoters has led to the formulation
of a consensus sequence (Fig. 5.7). If the transcription start point is assigned the position +1 then this
consensus sequence consists of the −35 region
(5′-TTGACA-) and the −10 region, or Pribnow box
(5′-TATAAT). RNA polymerase must bind to both
sequences to initiate transcription. The strength of a
promoter, i.e. how many RNA copies are synthesized
per unit time per enzyme molecule, depends on how
close its sequence is to the consensus. While the −35
and −10 regions are the sites of nearly all mutations
affecting promoter strength, other bases flanking
these regions can affect promoter activity (Hawley
& McClure 1983, Dueschle et al. 1986, Keilty &
Rosenberg 1987). The distance between the −35
and −10 regions is also important. In all cases examined, the promoter was weaker when the spacing
was increased or decreased from 17 bp.
Upstream (UP) elements located 5′ of the −35 hexamer in certain bacterial promoters are A+T-rich
sequences that increase transcription by interacting
with the α subunit of RNA polymerase. Gourse et al.
(1998) have identified UP sequences conferring
increased activity to the rrn core promoter. The best
UP sequence was portable and increased heterologous protein expression from the lac promoter by a
factor of 100.
Once RNA polymerase has initiated transcription
at a promoter, it will polymerize ribonucleotides until
it encounters a transcription-termination site in the
DNA. Bacterial DNA has two types of transcriptiontermination site: factor-independent and factordependent. As their names imply, these types are
distinguished by whether they work with just RNA

Fig. 5.7 The base sequence of the −10
and −35 regions of four natural promoters,
two hybrid promoters, and the consensus
promoter.

GC-rich inverted repeat

5’ - G T C A A A A G C C T C C G G T C G G A G G C T T T T G A C T
C A G T T T T C G G A G G C C A G C C T C C G A A A A C T G A - 5’
Run of
A residues

Fig. 5.8 Structure of a factor-independent transcriptional
terminator.

polymerase and DNA alone or need other factors
before they can terminate transcription. The factorindependent transcription terminators are easy to
recognize because they have similar sequences: an
inverted repeat followed by a string of A residues
(Fig. 5.8). Transcription is terminated in the string of
A residues, resulting in a string of U residues at the 3′
end of the mRNA. The factor-dependent transcription terminators have very little sequence in common with each other. Rather, termination involves
interaction with one of the three known E. coli termination factors, Rho (ρ), Tau (τ), and NusA. Most
expression vectors incorporate a factor-independent
termination sequence downstream from the site of
insertion of the cloned gene.
Specialist vectors have been developed that
facilitate the production of RNA probes and
interfering RNA
Although single-stranded DNA can be used as a
sequence probe in hybridization experiments, RNA
probes are preferred. The reasons for this are that the
rate of hybridization and the stability are far greater
for RNA–DNA hybrids compared with DNA–DNA
hybrids. To make an RNA probe, the relevant gene
sequence is cloned in a plasmid vector such that it is
under the control of a phage promoter. After purification, the plasmid is linearized with a suitable
restriction enzyme and then incubated with the
phage RNA polymerase and the four ribonucleoside
triphosphates (Fig. 5.9). No transcription terminator

83

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

Probe
sequence

SP6 promoter

Vector

Insert probe
sequence

Linearize
plasmid

Add SP6 RNA polymerase.
Unlabeled CTP, ATP, GTP.
Labeled UTP

Fig. 5.9 Method for
preparing RNA probes
from a cloned DNA
molecule using a phage
SP6 promoter and SP6
RNA polymerase.

is required because the RNA polymerase will fall off
the end of the linearized plasmid.
There are three reasons for using a phage promoter.
First, such promoters are very strong, enabling large
amounts of RNA to be made in vitro. Secondly, the
phage promoter is not recognized by the E. coli RNA
polymerase and so no transcription will occur inside
the cell. This minimizes any selection of variant
inserts. Thirdly, the RNA polymerases encoded by
phages such as SP6, T7, and T3 are much simpler
molecules to handle than the E. coli enzyme, since
the active enzyme is a single polypeptide.
If it is planned to probe RNA or single-stranded
DNA sequences, then it is essential to prepare RNA
probes corresponding to both strands of the insert.
One way of doing this is to have two different clones
corresponding to the two orientations of the insert.
An alternative method is to use a cloning vector in
which the insert is placed between two different,
opposing phage promoters (e.g. T7/T3 or T7/SP6)
that flank a multiple cloning sequence (see Fig. 5.5).
Since each of the two promoters is recognized by a
different RNA polymerase, the direction of transcription is determined by which polymerase is used.

High specific activity RNA probes

A further improvement has been introduced by
Evans et al. (1995). In their LITMUS vectors, the
polylinker regions are flanked by two modified T7
RNA polymerase promoters. Each contains a unique
restriction site (SpeI or AflII) that has been engineered into the T7 promoter consensus sequence
such that cleavage with the corresponding endonuclease inactivates that promoter. Both promoters
are active despite the presence of engineered sites.
Selective unidirectional transcription is achieved by
simply inactivating the other promoter by digestion
with SpeI or AflII prior to in vitro transcription
(Fig. 5.10). Since efficient labeling of RNA probes
demands that the template be linearized prior to
transcription, at a site downstream from the insert,
cutting at the site within the undesired promoter
performs both functions in one step. Should the
cloned insert contain either an SpeI or an AflII site,
the unwanted promoter can be inactivated by cutting at one of the unique sites within the polylinker.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a mechanism of
post-transcriptional gene silencing in which doublestranded RNA corresponding to a gene of interest
is introduced into an organism, thereby causing

(a)

pUC
origin

M13
origin

pLITMUSTM
2.8 kb

lacZ’

ampr

(b)

LITMUS 28

LITMUS 29

SnaBI
SpeI

SnaBI
SpeI

T7

T7

LITMUS 38
SnaBI
SpeI

T7

LITMUS 39
SnaBI
SpeI

T7

BglII
NsiI -Ppu 10I
BssHII
BsiW I
XhoI
EcoRI
PstI
EcoRV
BamHI
HindIII
NcoI
AatII
AgeI
XbaI
AvrII
SacI
KpnI-Acc65I
StuI

KpnI-Acc65I
SacI
AvrII
Xba I
AgeI
AatII
NcoI
HindIII
BamHI
EcoRV
PstI
EcoRI
XhoI
BsiWI
BssHII
NsiI -Ppu10I
BglII
StuI

ApaI-Bsp120I
MfeI
NgoMI
KasI
HindIII
PstI
EcoRV
BamHI
EcoRI
NheI
EagI
MluI
BspEII
BsrGI
SphI
SalI
StuI

SalI
SphI
BsrGII
Bsp EI
MluI
EagI
NheI
EcoRI
BamHI
EcoRV
PstI
HindIII
KasI
NgoMI
MfeI
Apa - Bsp120I
StuI

AflII

AflII

Afl II

Afl II

T7

T7

T7

T7

RNA transcript of top
strand of insert
5’

3’

T7 RNA Polymerase,
rNTP’s

AfIII

Spe I

AfIII

T7

Linearize with
AflII
SpeI
T7

Cloned
insert

LITMUS

T7
AflII

Linearize with
SpeI
SpeI

SpeI

AflII
T7

T7 RNA Polymerase,
rNTP’s

3’

5’
RNA transcript of
bottom strand of insert

Fig. 5.10 Structure and use of the LITMUS vectors for
making RNA probes. (a) Structure of the LITMUS vectors
showing the orientation and restriction sites of the four
polylinkers. (b) Method of using the LITMUS vectors
to selectively synthesize RNA probes from each strand of
a cloned insert. (Figure reproduced courtesy of New
England Biolabs.)

85

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

degradation of the matching mRNA. The applications of this technique are discussed in detail on
p. 318. The easiest way to make double-stranded
RNA is to use vectors like the LITMUS ones just
described. In this case the plasmid DNA containing
the cloned target of interest is digested, in separate
reactions, with SpeI and AflII. This will generate
a template for each RNA strand. If the templates
are mixed and used for in vitro transcription then
double-stranded RNA will be produced.
Vectors with strong, controllable promoters
are used to maximize synthesis of cloned
gene products
Provided that a cloned gene is preceded by a promoter recognized by the host cell, then there is a high
probability that there will be detectable synthesis
of the cloned gene product. However, much of the
interest in the application of recombinant DNA
technology lies in the possibility of facile synthesis
of large quantities of protein, either to study its
properties or because it has commercial value. In
such instances, detectable synthesis is not sufficient:
rather, it must be maximized. The factors affecting
the level of expression of a cloned gene are shown in
Table 5.2 and are reviewed by Baneyx (1999). Of these
factors, only promoter strength is considered here.
When maximizing gene expression it is not enough
to select the strongest promoter possible: the effects
of overexpression on the host cell also need to be
considered. Many gene products can be toxic to the
host cell even when synthesized in small amounts.
Examples include surface structural proteins (Beck &
Bremer 1980), proteins such as the PolA gene product that regulate basic cellular metabolism (Murray
& Kelley 1979), the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (Gregory et al. 1990), and
lentivirus envelope sequences (Cunningham et al.
1993). If such cloned genes are allowed to be
expressed there will be a rapid selection for mutants
that no longer synthesize the toxic protein. Even

Table 5.3 Control
of expression of
chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase
(CAT) in E. coli by three
different promoters.
The levels of CAT are
expressed as µg/mg
total protein.

Promoter
lPL
trc
T7

Table 5.2 Factors affecting the expression of
cloned genes.

Factor

Text

Promoter strength
Transcriptional termination
Plasmid copy number
Plasmid stability
Host-cell physiology
Translational initiation
sequences
Codon choice
mRNA structure

This page
Page 82
Page 57, Chapter 4
Page 59, Chapter 4
Chapters 4 & 5
Box 5.1, page 88
Box 5.1, page 88
Box 5.1, page 88

when overexpression of a protein is not toxic to the
host cell, high-level synthesis exerts a metabolic
drain on the cell. This leads to slower growth and
hence in culture there is selection for variants with
lower or no expression of the cloned gene because
these will grow faster. To minimize the problems
associated with high-level expression, it is usual to
use a vector in which the cloned gene is under the
control of a regulated promoter.
Many different vectors have been constructed
for regulated expression of gene inserts but most of
those in current use contain one of the following
controllable promoters: λ PL, T7, trc (tac), or BAD.
Table 5.3 shows the different levels of expression
that can be achieved when the gene for chloramphenicol transacetylase (CAT) is placed under the
control of three of these promoters.
The trc and tac promoters are hybrid promoters
derived from the lac and trp promoters (Brosius
1984). They are stronger than either of the two
parental promoters because their sequences are
more like the consensus sequence. Like lac, the trc
and tac promoters are inducibile by lactose and
isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside (IPTG). Vectors using
these promoters also carry the lacO operator and the
lacI gene, which encodes the repressor.

Uninduced level of CAT

Induced level of CAT

Ratio

0.0275
1.10
1.14

28.18
5.15
15.40

1025
4.7
13.5

86

CHAPTER 5

IPTG induction

IPTG Induction

Host cell

E.coli RNA
polymerase

T7 RNA
polymerase
T7 gene 1

Target gene

T7 RNA polymerase

IacO
Iac promoter

IacO
T7 promoter
Inactive

DE3
lac
repressor

Iac
repressor

Iacl gene

pET

lacl gene
T7 lysozyme

T7 lysozyme
gene

pLysS
or E

E.coli genome

Fig. 5.11 Strategy for regulating the expression of genes cloned into a pET vector. The gene for T7 RNA polymerase (gene 1) is
inserted into the chromosome of E. coli and transcribed from the lac promoter; therefore, it will be expressed only if the inducer
IPTG is added. The T7 RNA polymerase will then transcribe the gene cloned into the pET vector. If the protein product of the cloned
gene is toxic, it may be necessary to further reduce the transcription of the cloned gene before induction. The T7 lysozyme encoded
by a compatible plasmid, pLysS, will bind to any residual T7 RNA polymerase made in the absence of induction and inactivate it.
Also, the presence of lac operators between the T7 promoter and the cloned gene will further reduce transcription of the cloned
gene in the absence of the inducer IPTG. (Reprinted with permission from the Novagen Catalog, Novagen, Madison, Wisconsin,
1995.)

The pET vectors are a family of expression vectors
that utilize phage T7 promoters to regulate synthesis
of cloned gene products (Studier et al. 1990). The
general strategy for using a pET vector is shown
in Fig. 5.11. To provide a source of phage-T7 RNA
polymerase, E. coli strains that contain gene 1 of the
phage have been constructed. This gene is cloned
downstream of the lac promoter, in the chromosome,
so that the phage polymerase will only be synthesized
following IPTG induction. The newly synthesized
T7 RNA polymerase will then transcribe the foreign
gene in the pET plasmid. It is possible to minimize the
uninduced level of T7 RNA polymerase, if the protein
product of the cloned gene is toxic. First, a plasmid
compatible with pET vectors is selected and the
T7 lysS gene is cloned in it. When introduced into
a host cell carrying a pET plasmid, the lysS gene
will bind any residual T7 RNA polymerase (Studier
1991, Zhang & Studier 1997). Also, if a lac operator
is placed between the T7 promoter and the cloned
gene, this will further reduce transcription of the
insert in the absence of IPTG (Dubendorff & Studier
1991). Improvements in the yield of heterologous
proteins can sometimes be achieved by use of
selected host cells (Miroux & Walker 1996).

The λ PL promoter system combines very tight
transcriptional control with high levels of gene
expression. This is achieved by putting the cloned
gene under the control of the PL promoter carried on
a vector, while the PL promoter is controlled by a cI
repressor gene in the E. coli host. This cI gene is itself
under the control of the tryptophan (trp) promoter
(Fig. 5.12). In the absence of exogenous tryptophan,
the cI gene is transcribed and the cI repressor binds to
the PL promoter, preventing expression of the cloned
gene. Upon addition of tryptophan, the trp repressor
binds to the cI gene, preventing synthesis of the cI
repressor. In the absence of cI repressor, there is a high
level of expression from the very strong PL promoter.
The pBAD vectors, like the ones based on PL promoter, offer extremely tight control of expression of
cloned genes (Guzman et al. 1995). The pBAD vectors
carry the promoter of the araBAD (arabinose) operon
and the gene encoding the positive and negative
regulator of this promoter, araC. AraC is a transcriptional regulator that forms a complex with
l-arabinose. In the absence of arabinose, AraC binds
to the O2 and I1 half-sites of the araBAD operon,
forming a 210 bp DNA loop and thereby blocking
transcription (Fig. 5.13). As arabinose is added to

87

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

Minus tryptophan

Plus tryptophan
Tryptophan

Transcription
Ptrp

PO

Fig. 5.12 Control of
cloned gene expression
using the λcI promoter.
See text for details.
(Diagram reproduced
courtesy of InVitrogen
Corporation.)

No transcription
λcI repressor

PL

ATG

Vector

O2
C

AraC dimer

N

C

Pc

No transcription

I1

I2

pBAD

+ arabinose

N
N
Transcription
CAP

C

C

I1

I2

PO

Gene of interest

cI repressor

N

λcI repressor
Bacterial
chromosome

Transcription

No transcription
PO

Ptrp
trp repressor

Bacterial
chromosome

(a)

Pc

PO

pBAD

(b)

Fig. 5.13 Regulation of the pBAD promoter. (a) The
conformational changes that take place on addition of
arabinose. (b) Western blot showing the increase in
synthesis of a cloned gene product when different levels
of arabinose are added to a culture of the host cell.

the growth medium, it binds to AraC, thereby releasing the O2 site. This in turn causes AraC to bind to the
I2 site adjacent to the I1 site. This releases the DNA
loop and allows transcription to begin. Binding of
AraC to I1 and I2 is activated in the presence of
cAMP activator protein (CAP) plus cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP). If glucose is added to the
growth medium, this will lead to a repression of

PL

ATG

Gene of interest
Vector

cAMP synthesis, thereby decreasing expression from
the araBAD promoter. Thus one can titrate the level
of cloned gene product by varying the glucose and
arabinose content of the growth medium (Fig. 5.13).
According to Guzman et al. (1995), the pBAD vectors permit fine-tuning of gene expression. All that is
required is to change the sugar composition of the
medium. However, this is disputed by others (Siegele
& Hu 1997, Hashemzadeh-Bonehi et al. 1998).
Many of the vectors designed for high-level
expression also contain translation-initiation signals optimized for E. coli expression (see Box 5.1).
Purification of a cloned gene product can be
facilitated by use of purification tags
Many cloning vectors have been engineered so that
the protein being expressed will be fused to another
protein, called a tag, which can be used to facilitate
protein purification. Examples of tags include glutathione-S-transferase, the MalE (maltose-binding)
protein, and multiple histidine residues, which can
easily be purified by affinity chromatography. The
tag vectors are usually constructed so that the coding sequence for an amino acid sequence cleaved by
a specific protease is inserted between the coding
sequence for the tag and the gene being expressed.
After purification, the tag protein can be cleaved off
with the specific protease to leave a normal or nearly
normal protein. It is also possible to include in the tag
a protein sequence that can be assayed easily. This
permits assay of the cloned gene product when its
activity is not known or when the usual assay is
inconvenient. Three different examples of tags are
given below. The reader requiring a more detailed
insight should consult the review by La Vallie and
McCoy (1995).
To use a polyhistidine fusion for purification, the
gene of interest is first engineered into a vector in
which there is a polylinker downstream of six

88

CHAPTER 5

Box 5.1 Optimizing translation
High-level expression of a cloned gene
requires more than a strong promoter. The
mRNA produced during transcription needs to
be effectively translated into protein. Although
many factors can influence the rate of translation, the most important is the interaction
of the ribosome with the bases immediately
upstream from the initiation codon of the
gene. In bacteria, a key sequence is the
ribosome-binding site or Shine–Dalgarno (S–D)
sequence. The degree of complementarity
of this sequence with the 16S rRNA can affect
the rate of translation (De Boer & Hui 1990).
Maximum complementarity occurs with the
sequence 5′-UAAGGAGG-3′ (Ringquist et al.
1992). The spacing between the S-D sequence
and the initiation codon is also important.
Usually there are five to 10 bases, with eight
being optimal. Decreasing the distance below
4 bp or increasing it beyond 14 bp can reduce
translation by several orders of magnitude.
Translation is affected by the sequence of
bases that follow the S-D site (De Boer et al.
1983b). The presence of four A residues or
four T residues in this position gave the
highest translational efficiency. Translational
efficiency was 50% or 25% of maximum
when the region contained, respectively,
four C residues or four G residues.
The composition of the triplet immediately
preceding the AUG start codon also affects the
efficiency of translation. For translation of
b-galactosidase mRNA, the most favorable
combinations of bases in this triplet are UAU
and CUU. If UUC, UCA, or AGG replace UAU
or CUU, the level of expression is 20-fold less
(Hui et al. 1984).
The codon composition following the
AUG start codon can also affect the rate of
translation. For example, a change in the
third position of the fourth codon of a human
g-interferon gene resulted in a 30-fold change
in the level of expression (De Boer & Hui
1990). Also, there is a strong bias in the
second codon of many natural mRNAs,
which is quite different from the general bias
in codon usage. Highly expressed genes have
AAA (Lys) or GCU (Ala) as the second codon.
DevIin et al. (1988) changed all the G and C
nucleotides for the first four codons of a

granulocyte colony-stimulating factor gene
and expression increased from undetectable
to 17% of total cell protein.
Sequences upstream from the S-D site can
affect the efficiency of translation of certain
genes. In the E. coli rnd gene there is a run of
eight uracil residues. Changing two to five
of these residues has no effect on mRNA
levels but reduces translation by up to 95%
(Zhang & Deutscher 1992). Etchegaray and
Inouye (1999) have identified an element
downstream of the initiation codon, the
downstream box, which facilitates formation
of the translation-initiation complex. The
sequence of the 3′ untranslated region of the
mRNA can also be important. If this region is
complementary to sequences within the gene,
hairpin loops can form and hinder ribosome
movement along the messenger.
The genetic code is degenerate, and hence
for most of the amino acids there is more than
one codon. However, in all genes, whatever
their origin, the selection of synonymous
codons is distinctly non-random (for reviews,
see Kurland 1987, Ernst 1988 and McPherson
1988). The bias in codon usage has two
components: correlation with tRNA availability
in the cell, and non-random choices between
pyrimidine-ending codons. Ikemura (1981a)
measured the relative abundance of the 26
known tRNAs of E. coli and found a strong
positive correlation between tRNA abundance
and codon choice. Later, Ikemura (1981b)
noted that the most highly expressed
genes in E. coli contain mostly those codons
corresponding to major tRNAs but few codons
of minor tRNAs. In contrast, genes that are
expressed less well use more suboptimal
codons. Forman et al. (1998) noted significant
misincorporation of lysine, in place of arginine,
when the rare AGA codon was included in a
gene overexpressed in E. coli. It should be
noted that the bias in codon usage even
extends to the stop codons (Sharp & Bulmer
1988). UAA is favored in genes expressed at
high levels, whereas UAG and UGA are used
more frequently in genes expressed at a
lower level.
For a review of translation the reader should
consult Kozak (1999).

89

XhoI
SacI*
BglII
PstI
PvuII*
KpnI
EcoRI
SfuI
HindIII

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

EK MCS
ATG 6xHis Epitope Site

Fig. 5.14 Structure of
a vector (pBAD/His,
Invitrogen Corporation)
designed for the
expression of a cloned
gene as a fusion
protein containing a
polyhistidine sequence.
Three different variants
(A, B, C) allow the
insert to be placed in
each of the three
translational reading
frames. The sequence
shaded purple shows
the base sequence
which is altered in each
of the three vectors.
The lightly-shaded box
(AGATCT) is the Bgl II
site of the polylinker.
Note that the initial
A residue of the
restriction site is at a
different point in the
triplet codon in each of
the three sequences.

term

Ampicillin

araC

PBAD

pBAD/His
A,B,C
4.1 kb

ColE1

*Frame-dependent variations

COMMON SEQUENCE

VARIABLE SEQUENCE

GAC GAT GAC GAT AAG GAT
Asp

Asp

Asp

Asp Lys

Asp

GAC GAT GAC GAT AAG GAT
Asp

Asp

Asp

Asp Lys

Asp

GAC GAT GAC GAT AAG GAT
Asp

Asp

Asp

Asp Lys

Asp

CCG AGC TCG AGA TCT GCA GCT
Pro

Ser

Ser

Ars

Ser

Ala

Ala

CGA TGG GGA TCC GAG CTC GAG ATC TGC
Arg

Trp

Gly

Ser

Glu

Leu

Glu

Ile

Cys

CGA TGG ATC CGA CCT CGA GAT CTG CAG
Arg

Trp

Ile

Arg

Pro

Arg Asp

Leu

Gln

Enterokinase
cleavage

histidine residues and a proteolytic cleavage site.
In the example shown in Fig. 5.14, the cleavage site
is that for enterokinase. After induction of synthesis
of the fusion protein, the cells are lysed and the viscosity of the lysate is reduced by nuclease treatment.
The lysate is then applied to a column containing
immobilized divalent nickel, which selectively binds
the polyhistidine tag. After washing away any contaminating proteins, the fusion protein is eluted from
the column and treated with enterokinase to release
the cloned gene product.
For the cloned gene to be expressed correctly, it
has to be in the correct translational reading frame.
This is achieved by having three different vectors,
each with a polylinker in a different reading frame
(see Fig. 5.14). Enterokinase recognizes the sequence
(Asp)4Lys and cleaves immediately after the lysine

residue. Therefore, after enterokinase cleavage, the
cloned gene protein will have a few extra amino
acids at the N terminus. If desired, the cleavage
site and polyhistidines can be synthesized at the C
terminus. If the cloned gene product itself contains
an enterokinase cleavage site, then an alternative
protease, such as thrombin or factor Xa, with a different cleavage site can be used.
To facilitate assay of the fusion proteins, short
antibody recognition sequences can be incorporated
into the tag between the affinity label and the protease cleavage site. Some examples of recognizable
epitopes are given in Table 5.4. These antibodies can
be used to detect, by western blotting, fusion proteins
carrying the appropriate epitope. Note that a polyhistidine tag at the C terminus can function for both
assay and purification.

90

CHAPTER 5

Peptide sequence

Antibody recognition

-Glu-Gln-Lys-Leu-Ile Ser-GIu-Glu-Asp-Leu-His-His-His-His-His-His-COOH
-Gly-Lys-Pro-Ile-Pro-Asn-Pro-Leu-Leu-Gly-LeuAsp-Ser-Thr-

tag

sequen

e

cP
ta

ce Factor Xa
MC
Sc
lon
ed
ge
n

ori

AmpR

Express fusion protein in E. coli
Lyse cells
biotin
tag

Xa

gene product

Affinity chromatography
with streptavidin column

Streptavidin
biotin
tag

Streptavidin

Xa

gene product

Elute by adding excess biotin

biotin
tag

Xa

gene product

Cleave fusion protein with factor Xa

biotin
tag

gene product

Fig. 5.15 Purification of a cloned gene product synthesized
as a fusion to the biotin carboxylase carrier protein (tag). See
text for details.

Anti-myc antibody
Anti-His (C-terminal) antibody
Anti-V5 antibody

Table 5.4 Peptide
epitopes, and the
antibodies that
recognize them, for
use in assaying fusion
proteins.

Biotin is an essential cofactor for a number of
carboxylases important in cell metabolism. The biotin
in these enzyme complexes is covalently attached at
a specific lysine residue of the biotin carboxylase carrier protein. Fusions made to a segment of the carrier
protein are recognized in E. coli by biotin ligase, the
product of the birA gene, and biotin is covalently
attached in an ATP-dependent reaction. The expressed fusion protein can be purified using streptavidin affinity chromatography (Fig. 5.15). E. coli
expresses a single endogenous biotinylated protein,
but it does not bind to streptavidin in its native
configuration, making the affinity purification highly
specific for the recombinant fusion protein. The
presence of biotin on the fusion protein has an additional advantage: its presence can be detected with
enzymes coupled to streptavidin.
The affinity purification systems described above
suffer from the disadvantage that a protease is required
to separate the target protein from the affinity tag.
Also, the protease has to be separated from the
protein of interest. Chong et al. (1997, 1998) have
described a unique purification system that has
neither of these disadvantages. The system utilizes
a protein splicing element, an intein, from the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae VMA1 gene (see Box 5.2).
The intein is modified such that it undergoes a
self-cleavage reaction at its N terminus at low temperatures in the presence of thiols, such as cysteine,
dithiothreitol, or β-mercaptoethanol. The gene
encoding the target protein is inserted into a multiple
cloning site (MCS) of a vector to create a fusion
between the C terminus of the target gene and the
N terminus of the gene encoding the intein. DNA
encoding a small (5 kDa) chitin-binding domain
from Bacillus circulans was added to the C terminus of
the intein for affinity purification (Fig. 5.16).
The above construct is placed under the control of
an IPTG-inducible T7 promoter. When crude extracts
from induced cells are passed through a chitin column, the fusion protein binds and all contaminating
proteins are washed through. The fusion is then

Box 5.2 Inteins, exteins, and protein splicing
Protein splicing is defined as the excision of an
intervening protein sequence (the intein) from
a protein precursor. Splicing involves ligation
of the flanking protein fragments (the exteins)
to form a mature extein protein and the free
N-extein

intein. Protein splicing results in a native
peptide bond between the ligated exteins
and this differentiates it from other forms of
autoproteolysis.

Intein

C-extein

Precursor protein
Splicing

N-extein

C-extein

Intein

Mature extein protein

Sequence comparison and structural
analysis have indicated that the residues
responsible for splicing are ~100 amino acids
at the N terminus of the intein and ~50 amino
acids at the C terminus. These two splicing
regions are separated by a linker or a gene
encoding a homing endonuclease. If present in
N-extein

C-terminal
splicing region

CBD

T7 promoter

C-extein

Strip with
Elute SDS

Load F.T. Wash +DTT

Intein

Cloning and
expression
Target Protein

Linker or homing
endonuclease gene

Cleave

Target Gene

MCS

N-terminal
splicing region

a cell, the homing endonuclease makes a
double-stranded break in the DNA at or near
the insertion site (the home) of the intein
encoding it. This endonuclease activity
initiates the movement of the intein into
another allele of the same gene if that allele
lacks the intein.

–IPTG +IPTG
CBD

4°C
o.n.

Intein
Intein

Load and
wash

Inducible cleavage
+DTT at 4°C

Chitin
kDa
212
158
116
97.2
66.4
55.6

Precursor
Intein – CBD
MBP

42.7
Elute
Target Protein

36.5
26.6
20.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

Lane 1: Protein Marker.
Lane 2: Crude extract from uninduced cells.
Lane 3: Crude extract from cells, induced at 15°C for 16 hours.
Lane 4: Clarified crude extract from induced cells.
Lane 5: Chitin column flow through (F.T.).
Lane 6: Chitin column wash.
Lane 7: Quick DTT wash to distribute DTT evenly throughout the chitin column.
Lanes 8-9: Fraction of eluted MBP after stopping column flow and inducing a self-cleavage reaction at 4°C overnight.
Lane 10: SDS stripping of remaining proteins bound to chitin column (mostly the cleaved intein-CBD fusion).

Fig. 5.16 Purification of a cloned gene product synthesized as a fusion with an intein protein. (Figure reproduced courtesy of
New England Biolabs.)

92

CHAPTER 5

Fig. 5.17 Inclusions of Trp polypeptide–proinsulin fusion protein in E. coli. (Left) Scanning electron micrograph of cells fixed in
the late logarithmic phase of growth; the inset shows normal E. coli cells. (Right) Thin section through E. coli cells producing Trp
polypeptide–insulin A chain fusion protein. (Photographs reproduced from Science courtesy of Dr. D.C. Williams (Eli Lilly & Co.)
and the American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

induced to undergo intein-mediated self-cleavage on
the column by incubation with a thiol. This releases
the target protein, while the intein chitin-binding
domain remains bound to the column.
Vectors are available that promote
solubilization of expressed proteins
One of the problems associated with the overproduction of proteins in E. coli is the sequestration of
the product into insoluble aggregates or “inclusion
bodies” (Fig. 5.17). They were first reported in strains
overproducing insulin A and B chains (Williams
et al. 1982). At first, their formation was thought to
be restricted to the overexpression of heterologous
proteins in E. coli, but they can form in the presence
of high levels of normal E. coli proteins, e.g. subunits of RNA polymerase (Gribskov & Burgess 1983).
Two parameters that can be manipulated to reduce
inclusion-body formation are temperature and growth
rate. There are a number of reports which show that
lowering the temperature of growth increases the
yield of correctly folded, soluble protein (Schein &

Noteborn 1988, Takagi et al. 1988, Schein 1991).
Media compositions and pH values that reduce the
growth rate also reduce inclusion-body formation.
Renaturation of misfolded proteins can sometimes
be achieved following solubilization in guanidinium
hydrochloride (Lilie et al. 1998).
Three “genetic” methods of preventing inclusionbody formation have been described. In the first of
these, the host cell is engineered to overproduce a
chaperon (e.g. DnaK, GroEL, or GroES proteins) in
addition to the protein of interest (Van Dyk et al.
1989, Blum et al. 1992, Thomas et al. 1997).
Castanie et al. (1997) have developed a series of
vectors which are compatible with pBR322-type
plasmids and which encode the overproduction of
chaperons (proteins whose function is to assist with
the folding and refolding of other proteins). These
vectors can be used to test the effect of chaperons on
the solubilization of heterologous gene products.
Even with excess chaperon there is no guarantee of
proper folding. The second method involves making
minor changes to the amino acid sequence of the target protein. For example, cysteine-to-serine changes

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

in fibroblast growth factor minimized inclusion-body
formation (Rinas et al. 1992). The third method is
derived from the observation that many proteins
produced as insoluble aggregates in their native
state are synthesized in soluble form as thioredoxin
fusion proteins (La Vallie et al. 1993). More recently,
Davis et al. (1999) have shown that the NusA and
GrpE proteins, as well as bacterioferritin, are even
better than thioredoxin at solubilizing proteins
expressed at a high level. Kapust and Waugh (1999)
have reported that the maltose-binding protein is
also much better than thioredoxin.
Building on the work of La Vallie et al. (1993), a
series of vectors has been developed in which the
gene of interest is cloned into an MCS and the gene
product is produced as a thioredoxin fusion protein
with an enterokinase cleavage site at the fusion
point. After synthesis, the fusion protein is released
from the producing cells by osmotic shock and
purified. The desired protein is then released by
enterokinase cleavage. To simplify the purification
of thioredoxin fusion proteins, Lu et al. (1996) systematically mutated a cluster of surface amino acid
residues. Residues 30 and 62 were converted to
histidine and the modified (“histidine patch”) thioredoxin could now be purified by affinity chromatography on immobilized divalent nickel. An alternative
purification method was developed by Smith et al.
(1998). They synthesized a gene in which a short
biotinylation peptide is fused to the N terminus
of the thioredoxin gene to generate a new protein
called BIOTRX. They constructed a vector carrying
the BIOTRX gene, with an MCS at the C terminus,
and the birA gene. After cloning a gene in the
MCS, a fused protein is produced which can be
purified by affinity chromatography on streptavidin
columns.
An alternative way of keeping recombinant
proteins soluble is to export them to the periplasmic
space (see next section). However, even here they
may still be insoluble. Barth et al. (2000) solved this
problem by growing the producing bacteria under
osmotic stress (4% NaCl plus 0.5 mol/l sorbitol) in
the presence of compatible solutes. Compatible solutes
are low-molecular-weight osmolytes, such as glycine
betaine, that occur naturally in halophilic bacteria
and are known to protect proteins at high salt concentrations. Adding glycine betaine for the cultivation of E. coli under osmotic stress not only allowed
the bacteria to grow under these otherwise inhibitory
conditions but also produced a periplasmic environment for the generation of correctly folded recombinant proteins.

93

Proteins that are synthesized with signal
sequences are exported from the cell
Gram-negative bacteria such as E. coli have a complex wall–membrane structure comprising an inner,
cytoplasmic membrane separated from an outer
membrane by a cell wall and periplasmic space.
Secreted proteins may be released into the periplasm
or integrated into or transported across the outer
membrane. In E. coli it has been established that
protein export through the inner membrane to the
periplasm or to the outer membrane is achieved by a
universal mechanism known as the general export
pathway (GEP). This involves the sec gene products
(for review see Lory 1998). Proteins that enter the
GEP are synthesized in the cytoplasm with a signal
sequence at the N terminus. This sequence is cleaved
by a signal or leader peptidase during transport.
A signal sequence has three domains: a positively
charged amino-terminal region, a hydrophobic core,
consisting of five to 15 hydrophobic amino acids, and
a leader peptidase cleavage site. A signal sequence
attached to a normally cytoplasmic protein will
direct it to the export pathway.
Many signal sequences derived from naturally
occurring secretory proteins (e.g. OmpA, OmpT,
PelB, β-lactamase, alkaline phosphatase, and phage
M13 gIII) support the efficient translocation of
heterologous peptides across the inner membrane
when fused to their amino termini. In some cases,
however, the preproteins are not readily exported
and either become “jammed” in the inner membrane, accumulate in precursor inclusion bodies
or are rapidly degraded within the cytoplasm. In
practice, it may be necessary to try several signal
sequences (Berges et al. 1996) and/or overproduce
different chaperons to optimize the translocation of a
particular heterologous protein. A first step would be
to try the secretion vectors offered by a number of
molecular-biology suppliers and which are variants
of the vectors described above.
It is possible to engineer proteins such that they
are transported through the outer membrane and
are secreted into the growth medium. This is achieved
by making use of the type I, Sec-independent secretion system. The prototype type I system is the
hemolysin transport system, which requires a short
carboxy-terminal secretion signal, two translocators
(HlyB and D), and the outer-membrane protein TolC.
If the protein of interest is fused to the carboxyterminal secretion signal of a type I-secreted protein,
it will be secreted into the medium provided HlyB,
HlyD, and TolC are expressed as well (Spreng et al.

94

CHAPTER 5

2000). An alternative presentation of recombinant
proteins is to express them on the surface of the
bacterial cell using any one of a number of carrier
proteins (for review, see Cornelis 2000).

Gene

ccdB
attR

attR
attB

attB
Expression
clone

Destination
vector

Ap

Ap
LR clonase

The Gateway® system is a highly efficient
method for transferring DNA fragments
to a large number of different vectors
The traditional method for moving a gene fragment
from one vector to another would involve restriction
enzyme digestion and would include some or all of
the following steps:
•
•
•
•
•
•

restriction endonuclease digestion of the donor
plasmid;
purification of the gene insert;
restriction digestion of the target vector;
ligation of the gene insert with the digested target
vector;
transformation of E. coli and selection of the new
recombinant plasmid;
isolation of the new plasmid and confirmation by
endonuclease digestion and gel electrophoresis
that it has the correct properties.

The Gateway system is designed to replace all these
steps by using the phage λ site-specific recombinase
(Box 3.3, p. 51) in a simple two-step procedure
(Fig. 5.18).
To use the Gateway system, the gene of interest is
cloned by conventional means in a Gateway entry
vector. This vector carries two att sites that are
recognized by the λ site-specific recombinase and the
cloned gene should lie between them. Moving this
cloned gene to another vector (destination vector) is
very simple. The entry vector containing the cloned
gene is mixed with the destination vector and λ
recombinase in vitro and after a short incubation
period the desired recombinant is selected by transformation (Fig. 5.18). The beauty of the Gateway
system is that after the initial entry clone is made the
gene of interest can be transferred to many other
vectors (Fig. 5.19) while maintaining orientation
and reading frame with high efficiencies (>99%).
Putting it all together: vectors with
combinations of features
Many of the vectors in current use, particularly those
that are commercially available, have combinations
of the features described in previous sections. Two

+

+

Gene

ccdB

attL

Transform
E. coli and
select AmpR

attL
attP

Entry
clone

Byproduct

KmR

attP

KmR

Fig. 5.18 The principle of the Gateway system. Following
transformation, the only cells that can form colonies are ones
carrying a plasmid encoding ApR and lacking ccdB. ApR,
ampicillin resistance; KmR, kanamycin resistance; ccdB, a
counterselectable gene (see Box 4.1); att, sites for the λ
recombinase (see Box 3.3). (Figure reproduced courtesy
of the InVitrogen Life Technologies.)

Mammalian
vector

Viral
vector

Gene

Gene

att

att

att

E. coli
vector

Entry
clone

Gene
att

att

Plant
vector

Gene
att

att

Baculovirus
vector

Gene
att

att

Two-hybrid
vector

Gene
att

att

Gene
att

att

att

Fig. 5.19 The use of the Gateway system to move a gene
unchanged from an entry clone to many different vectors.
(Figure reproduced courtesy of the InVitrogen Life
Technologies.)

examples are described here to show the connection
between the different features. The first example is
the LITMUS vectors that were described earlier
(p. 83) and which are used for the generation of RNA
probes. They exhibit the following features:
•

The polylinkers are located in the lacZ′ gene and
inserts in the polylinker prevent α-complementation. Thus blue/white screening (see Box 3.2
on p. 45) can be used to distinguish clones with
inserts from those containing vector only.

Cosmids, phasmids, and other advanced vectors

Cla I 3018
T7 promoter
tac promoter
Hpa I 2777

purification
tag sequence
1-386

ori

PinPointTM Xa-1
Vector
(3351bp)

•

EcoR I 3277
Pst I 3316
Sal I 52
BstX I 264
Sac I 377

Factor
Xa site
379-390
Nde I
532

Nru I
Hind III
Pvu II
BamH I
Acc65 I
Kpn I
EcoR V
Bgl II
Sma I
Not I
SP6

•
389
392
400
404
410
414
418
422
430
435
452

Ampr
Fsp I 1483

Xmn I 1106
Pvu I 1337

95

Three different vectors of each type permitting
translation of the cloned gene insert in each of the
three reading frames.
Presence of a phage SP6 promoter distal to the
MCS to permit the synthesis of RNA probes complementary to the cloned gene. Note that the
orientation of the cloned gene is known and so
the RNA probe need only be synthesized from one
strand.

What is absent from these vectors is an M13 origin of
replication to facilitate synthesis of single strands for
DNA sequencing.

Sca I 1225

Fig. 5.20 Structural features of a PinPointTM vector.
(Figure reproduced courtesy of Promega Corporation.)

Suggested reading

•

Goldberg A.L. (2003) Protein degradation and protection against misfolded or damaged proteins. Nature
426, 895–9.
This review provides useful insight into the problems associated with overexpression of proteins.

•

•

•

The LITMUS polylinkers contain a total of 32
unique restriction sites. Twenty-nine of these
enzymes leave four-base overhangs and three
leave blunt ends. The three blunt cutting enzymes
have been placed at either end of the polylinker
and in the middle of it.
The vectors carry both the pUC and the M13
ori regions. Under normal conditions the vector
replicates as a double-stranded plasmid but, on
infection with helper phage (M13KO7), singlestranded molecules are produced and packaged
in phage protein.
The single-stranded molecules produced on helper
phage addition have all the features necessary for
DNA sequencing (see p. 81).
The vectors are small (<3 kb) and with a pUC ori
have a high copy number.

The second example is the PinPoint series of
expression vectors (Fig. 5.20). These vectors have
the following features:
•

•
•
•

Expression is under the control of either the T7 or
the tac promoter, allowing the user great flexibility of control over the synthesis of the cloned gene
product.
Some of them carry a DNA sequence specifying
synthesis of a signal peptide.
Presence of an MCS adjacent to a factor-Xa
cleavage site.
Synthesis of an N-terminal biotinylated sequence
to facilitate purification.

Hurst M. & Dubel S. (2005) Phage display vectors
for the in vitro generation of antibody fragments.
Methods in Molecular Biology 295, 71–96.
Lee S.Y., Choi J.H. & Xu Z. (2003) Microbial cell surface
display. Trends in Biotechnology 21, 45–52.
Mergulhao F.J., Summers D.K. & Monteiro G.A. (2005)
Recombinant protein secretion in Escherichia coli.
Biotechnology Advances 23, 177–202.
Pugsley A.P., Francetic O., Driessen A.J. & de Lorenzo V.
(2004) Getting out: protein traffic in prokaryotes.
Molecular Microbiology 52, 3–11.
These four papers present different aspects of protein export
in E.coli and other bacteria.
Schweizer H.P. (2003) Applications of the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Flp-FRT system in bacterial genetics. Journal
of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology 5, 67–77.
A very useful review of methodology for allele replacement
in strain construction.
Gustafsson C., Govinddarajan S. & Minshull J. (2004)
Codon bias and heterologous protein expression.
Trends in Biotechnology 22, 346–53.
Swartz J.R. (2001) Advances in Escherichia coli production of therapeutic proteins. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology 12, 195–201.
Two short but excellent reviews of the factors that affect
overexpression of proteins.
Jansson J.K. (2003) Marker and reporter genes: illuminating tools for environmental microbiologists. Current Opinion in Microbiology 6, 310–16.
This review focuses on a topic not discussed here: the labeling
of strains and plasmids with non-selective markers.

CHAPTER 6
Gene-cloning strategies

Introduction
Papers reporting the results of genome mapping
and sequencing projects now appear in the scientific
literature at the rate of about one every fortnight,
and by the time this book is published it is likely
that over 200 genomes will have been completely
sequenced and annotated. Already, it is possible to
obtain “off-the-shelf” cloned genes and cDNAs for
many of our most important organisms, and even
some very obscure ones. As an example, Table 6.1
lists the mammalian BAC libraries that are currently
available. In addition to humans, this includes all the
expected laboratory model species, many domestic
mammals, and a diverse collection of other mammals which are being studied to facilitate phylogenetic analysis. Is it necessary or worth the effort to
clone single genes any more?
There are several reasons why single-gene cloning
is still an important part of molecular biology. One
rather prosaic reason is that there remain many
genomes that have yet to be mapped or sequenced –
an investigator wishing to clone a specific gene from
the polar bear, for example, would have no choice
other than to work at the single gene level. More
importantly, however, genome sequences reveal only
part of the information available for a given gene.
In contrast, cDNA sequences, which are reverse
transcribed from mRNA, reveal expression profiles
in different cell types, developmental stages, and in
response to natural or experimentally simulated
external stimuli. Additionally, for higher organisms,
cDNA sequences provide useful information about
splice isoforms and their abundance in different tissues and developmental stages. A further reason is
that many cloning strategies reveal extra functional
information about genes, e.g. expression profiles
or biochemical functions. The task of functionally
annotating genomes always lags way behind the
structural annotation phase, and gene-cloning strategies therefore remain of value for the elucidation of
gene function.

In Chapters 2–5 we discussed DNA cutting and
joining techniques and the different types of vectors
that are available for cloning DNA molecules. One
question that was overlooked in these earlier chapters was how these segments of DNA for cloning are
obtained in the first place. In simple subcloning procedures, where DNA fragments are removed from
one vector and inserted into another, the target DNA
is available in a pure form as part of the source vector.
We now need to consider what happens when the
source of donor DNA is very complex. We may wish,
for example, to isolate a single gene from the human
genome or from the maize genome. In such cases,
the target sequence could be diluted over a millionfold by other genes and unwanted genomic DNA.
We need to sift rapidly through large numbers
of unwanted sequences to identify our particular
target.
There are two major approaches for isolating
sequences from complex sources such as genomic
DNA or cDNA, but in each case the cloning strategy
is divided into four stages as shown in Fig. 6.1. The
first, a cell-based cloning strategy, is to divide the
source DNA into manageable fragments and clone
everything. Such a collection of clones, representative of the entire starting population, is known as
a library. We must then screen the library to identify
our clone of interest using a procedure that discriminates between the desired clone and all the others.
A number of such procedures are discussed later
in the chapter. The second strategy is to selectively
amplify the target sequence directly from the source
DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
and then clone this individual fragment. Each strategy has its advantages and disadvantages. In the
library approach, screening is carried out after the
entire source DNA population has been cloned
indiscriminately. Conversely, in the PCR approach,
the screening step is built into the first stage of the
procedure, so that only these selected fragments are
actually cloned. In this chapter we consider principles for the construction and screening of genomic

Gene-cloning strategies

97

Table 6.1 Mammalian BAC libraries currently available or in production.

MONOTREMES
Echidna, Tachyglossus aculeatus
Platypus, Ornithorhynchus anatinus
MARSUPIALS
American opossum, Didelphis virginianus
Laboratory opossum, Monodelphis domestica
Tammar wallaby, Macropus eugenii
PLACENTALS
Afrotheria
Proboscidea
African savanna elephant, Loxodonta africana
Xenarthra
Nine-banded armadillo, Dasypus novemcinctus
Laurasiatheria
Carnivora
Domestic dog, Canis familiaris
Domestic cat, Felis catus
Clouded leopard, Neofelis nebulosa
Perissodactyla
Domestic horse, Equus cabailus
Cetartiodactyla
Formosan muntjac, Muntiacus reevesi
Indian muntjac, Muntiacus muntjac
Domestic cattle, Bos taurus
Domestic sheep, Ovis aries
Domestic pig, Sus scrofa
Domestic goat, Capra hircus
Chiroptera
Horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus ferrumequinum
Brown bat, Myotis lucifugus
Flying fox, Pteropus livingstoni
Eulipotyphla
Hedgehog, Atilerex albiventris
Shrew, Sorex araneus

Euarchontoglires
Lagomorpha
Rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus
Rodentia
Deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus
Hamster, Cricetulus griseus
Mouse, Mus musculus
Rat, Rattus norvegicus
Ground squirrel, Spermophilus tridecemlineatus
Primates
Baboon, Papio hamadryas
Black lemur, Eulemur macaco
Chimpanzee, Pan troglodytes
Colobus monkey, Colobus guereza
Dusky titi, Callicebus moloch
Galago, Otolemur gametti
Gibbon, Hylobates concolor
Gorilla, Gorilla gorilla
Ring-tailed lemur, Lemur catta
Macaque, Macaca mulatta
Marmoset, Callithrix jacchus
Mouse lemur, Microcebus murinus
Sumatran orangutan, Pongo pygmaeus
Owl Monkey, Aotus trivirgatus/nancymai
Squirrel monkey, Saimiri boliviensis
Tarsier, Tarsius bancanus
Vervet monkey, Cercopithacus aethiops
Scandentia
Tree shrew, Tupaia minor

For more information, see http://www.genome.gov/10001852 and http://bacpac.chori.org/.

and cDNA libraries, and compare the library-based
route for gene isolation to equivalent PCR-based
techniques.

Genomic DNA libraries are generated by
fragmenting the genome and cloning
overlapping fragments in vectors
The first genomic libraries were cloned in
simple plasmid and phage vectors
Although the human genome has been mapped,
cloned, and sequenced in its entirety, it is still useful
to examine how we might go about generating a
genomic library and isolating a given gene, because

the principles apply to all genomes. We could simply
digest total genomic DNA with a restriction endonuclease, such as EcoRI, insert the fragments into a
suitable phage λ vector, and then attempt to isolate
the desired clone. How many recombinants would
we have to screen in order to isolate the right one?
Assuming EcoRI gives, on average, fragments of
about 4 kb, and given that the size of the human
haploid genome is in the region of 2.8 × 106 kb, it
is clear that over 7 × 105 independent recombinants must be prepared and screened in order to
have a reasonable chance of including the desired
sequence. In other words we have to obtain a very
large number of recombinants, which together contain a complete collection of all of the DNA sequences
in the entire genome, a genomic library.

98

CHAPTER 6

DNA
fragments

Restriction
endonuclease
digestion

Mechanical
shearing

Duplex
cDNA
synthesis

Direct
chemical
synthesis

PCR

Joining to
vector

Homopolymer
tailing

Ligation
cohesive
termini

Blunt-end
ligation
(no linker)

Linker
molecules

TA
cloning

Introduction
into host cell

Selection or
screening

Transfection
with recombinant
phage DNA

Hybridization

Transformation
with recombinant
plasmid DNA

PCR

Immunochemical

In vitro packaging into phage
coat: transduction with
recombinant phage or cosmid

Protein–protein
interactions

Protein–ligand
interactions

Functional
complementation

Gain of
function

Fig. 6.1 Generalized overview of cloning strategies, with favored routes shown by arrows. Note that in cell-based cloning
strategies, DNA fragments are initially generated and cloned in a non-specific manner, so that screening for the desired clone is
carried out at the end of the process. Conversely, when specific DNA fragments are obtained by PCR or direct chemical synthesis,
there is no need for subsequent screening.

There are two problems with the above approach.
First, the gene may be cut internally one or more
times by EcoRI so that it is not obtained as a single
fragment. This is likely if the gene is large. Also, it
may be desirable to obtain extensive regions flanking
the gene or whole gene clusters. Fragments averaging about 4 kb are likely to be inconveniently short.
Alternatively, the gene may be contained on an
EcoRI fragment that is larger than the vector can
accept. In this case the appropriate gene would not
be cloned at all.
These problems can be overcome by cloning
random DNA fragments of a large size (for λ replacement vectors, approximately 20 kb). Since the DNA
is randomly fragmented, there will be no systematic
exclusion of any sequence. Furthermore, clones will
overlap one another, allowing the sequence of very
large genes to be assembled. Because of the larger
size of each cloned DNA fragment, fewer clones are
required for a complete or nearly complete library.
How many clones are required? Let n be the size of
the genome relative to a single cloned fragment.
Thus for the human genome (2.8 × 106 kb) and an
average cloned fragment size of 20 kb, n = 1.4 × 105.
The number of independent recombinants required

in the library must be greater than n, because
sampling variation will lead to the inclusion of
some sequences several times, and the exclusion
of other sequences in a library of just n recombinants. Clarke & Carbon (1976) derived a formula
that relates the probability (P) of including any DNA
sequence in a random library of N independent
recombinants:
N=

ln (1 − P)
⎛
1⎞
ln ⎜1 − ⎟
n⎠
⎝

Therefore, to achieve a 95% probability (P = 0.95)
of including any particular sequence in a random
human genomic DNA library of 20 kb fragment size:
N=

ln (1 − 0.95)
⎛
⎞
1
ln ⎜1 −
⎟
5
1.4 × 10 ⎠
⎝

= 4.2 × 105

Notice that a considerably higher number of recombinants is required to achieve a 99% probability, for
here N = 6.5 × 105.

Gene-cloning strategies

λ Charon 4A DNA
(replacement vector)

High mol. wt eukaryotic
DNA (>100 kb)
Cleave with a mixture
of HaeIII and AluI
(very partial digest)

Anneal
natural
cohesive
ends of λ

Size fractionate
~20 kb
EcoRI methylase to
block EcoRI sites
Me Me
Me Me
Blunt-end ligation with
EcoRI linker molecules
Me Me
Me Me
EcoRI
Me Me

EcoRI
+
Internal fragments
Size fractionate
to remove
internal
fragments

Me Me
Anneal EcoRI cohesive ends. Ligate

Me Me
Me Me

Me Me
Me Me
Packaging in vitro
Phage particle

Fig. 6.2 Maniatis’ strategy for producing a representative
gene library.

How can appropriately sized random fragments be
produced? Various methods are available. Random
breakage by mechanical shearing is appropriate
because the average fragment size can be controlled,
but insertion of the resulting fragments into vectors
requires additional modification steps. The more
commonly used procedure involves restriction endonucleases. In the strategy devised by Maniatis et al.
(1978) (Fig. 6.2) the target DNA is digested with a
mixture of two restriction enzymes. These enzymes
have tetranucleotide recognition sites, which therefore occur frequently in the target DNA and in a
complete double-digest would produce fragments
averaging less than 1 kb. However, only a partial
restriction digest is carried out, and therefore the
majority of the fragments are large (in the range
10–30 kb). Given that the chances of cutting at each
of the available restriction sites are more or less
equivalent, such a reaction effectively produces a
random set of overlapping fragments. These can be
size fractionated, e.g. by gel electrophoresis, so as
to give a random population of fragments of about
20 kb, which are suitable for insertion into a λ

99

replacement vector. Packaging in vitro (p. 70)
ensures that an appropriately large number of independent recombinants can be recovered, which will
give an almost completely representative library.
More sophisticated vectors have been
developed to facilitate genomic library
construction
In the Maniatis strategy, the use of two different
restriction endonucleases with completely unrelated
recognition sites, HaeIII and AluI, assists in obtaining fragmentation that is nearly random. These
enzymes both produce blunt ends, and the cloning
strategy requires linkers (see Fig. 6.2). Therefore, in
the early days of vector development, a large number
of different vectors became available with alternative restriction sites and genetic markers suitable
for varied cloning strategies. A good example of this
diversity is the Charon series, which included both
insertion and replacement type vectors (Blattner
et al. 1977, Williams & Blattner 1979).
A convenient simplification can be achieved by
using a single restriction endonuclease that cuts
frequently, such as Sau3AI. This will create a partial
digest that is slightly less random than that achieved
with a pair of enzymes. However, it has the great
advantage that the Sau3AI fragments can be readily
inserted into λ replacement vectors, such as λEMBL3
(Frischauf et al. 1983), which have been digested
with BamHI (Fig. 6.3). This is because Sau3AI and
BamHI create the same cohesive ends (see p. 41).
Due to the convenience and efficiency of this strategy, the λEMBL series of vectors have been very
widely used for genomic library construction. Note
that λEMBL vectors also carry the red and gam genes
on the stuffer fragment and a chi site on one of the
vector arms, allowing convenient positive selection
on the basis of the Spi phenotype (see p. 67). Most λ
vectors currently used for genomic library construction are positively selected on this basis, including
λ2001 (Karn et al. 1984), λDASH, and λFIX (Sorge
1988). λDASH and λFIX and their derivatives are
particularly versatile because the multiple cloning
sites flanking the stuffer fragment contain opposed
promoters for the T3 and T7 RNA polymerases. If the
recombinant vector is digested with a restriction
endonuclease that cuts frequently, only short fragments of insert DNA are left attached to these promoters. This allows RNA probes to be generated
corresponding to the ends of any genomic insert.
These are ideal for probing the library to identify

100

CHAPTER 6

Polylinker
BamHI
SalI
EcoRI
red +

AB

SalI

Polylinker
BamHI
EcoRI SalI
gam+

λEMBL3A
Target high molecular
weight genomic DNA

SalI

(1) Partial Sau3AI digest
(2) Phosphatase

Digest with BamHI
and EcoRI
AB

BamHI red +

gam+

EcoRI
Left arm
Polylinker
oligonucleotide

BamHI

EcoRI

Sau3AI
HO

Right arm
Polylinker
oligonucleotide

Sau3AI Sau3AI

Isopropanol precipitation
Polylinker oligonucleotide
not precipitated
AB

BamHI

HO

EcoRI

Sau3AI

Sau3AI

OH HO

Sau3AI

BamHI

Left arm

Sau3AI Sau3AI Sau3AI
OH HO
OH

OH

Sau3AI

HO

OH
Size fractionation not necessary

Right arm

Ligate, mix
AB

(BamHI)

(BamHI)

Left arm

Right arm
SalI

+

Recombinant phage
DNA concatemers

SalI
Packaging in vitro

Recombinant
(Spi–) phage
plaques

Plate on
P2 lysogen
sup+

Fig. 6.3 Creation of a genomic DNA library using the phage-λ vector EMBL3A. High-molecular-weight genomic DNA is
partially digested with Sau3AI. The fragments are treated with phosphatase to remove their 5′ phosphate groups. The vector is
digested with BamHI and EcoRI, which cut within the polylinker sites. The tiny BamHI/EcoRI polylinker fragments are discarded
in the isopropanol precipitation, or alternatively the vector arms may be purified by preparative agarose gel electrophoresis. The
vector arms are then ligated with the partially digested genomic DNA. The phosphatase treatment prevents the genomic DNA
fragments from ligating together. Non-recombinant vector cannot reform because the small polylinker fragments have been
discarded. The only packageable molecules are recombinant phages. These are obtained as plaques on a P2 lysogen of sup+ E. coli.
The Spi− selection ensures recovery of phage lacking red and gam genes. A sup+ host is necessary because, in this example, the
vector carries amber mutations in genes A and B. These mutations increase biological containment, and can be applied to selection
procedures, such as recombinational selection, or tagging DNA with a sup+ gene. Ultimately, the foreign DNA can be excised from
the vector by virtue of the SalI sites in the polylinker. (Note: Rogers et al. (1988) have shown that the EMBL3 polylinker sequence is
not exactly as originally described. It contains an extra sequence with a previously unreported PstI site. This does not affect most
applications as a vector.)

overlapping clones and have the great advantage
that they can be made conveniently, directly from
the vector, without recourse to subcloning. Vector
maps of λDASH and λFIX are shown in Fig. 6.4. λFIX
is similar to λDASH, except that it incorporates

additional XhoI sites flanking the stuffer fragment.
Digestion of the vector with XhoI followed by partial
filling of the sticky ends prevents vector re-ligation.
However, partially filled Sau3AI sticky ends are compatible with the partially filled XhoI ends, although

101

Gene-cloning strategies

red+

J
20 kb

gam+

SalI
Xba I
N

C II

Xba I
SalI
A

Xba I
XhoI
Sac I
HindIII
BamHI
EcoRI

T7
EcoRI
BamHI
HindIII
Sac I
XhoI
Xba I

T3

cro

(a)

O P QS R

9 kb

14 kb

λDASH

(b)

20 kb

not with each other. This strategy prevents the ligation of vector arms without genomic DNA, and also
prevents the insertion of multiple fragments.
Genomic libraries for higher eukaryotes are
usually constructed using high-capacity
vectors
In place of phage λ derivatives, a number of higher
capacity cloning vectors such as cosmids, BACs,
PACs, and YACs are now available for the construction of genomic libraries. The advantage of such
vectors is that the average insert size is much larger
than for λ replacement vectors. Thus, the number of
recombinants that need to be screened to identify a
particular gene of interest is correspondingly lower,
large genes are more likely to be contained within a
single clone, and fewer clones are required to assemble a contig. Such vectors are therefore widely used
for the construction of libraries representing large
genomes.
Generally, strategies similar to the Maniatis
method discussed above are used to construct such
libraries, except that the partial restriction digest
conditions are optimized for larger fragment sizes,
and size fractionation must be preformed by specialized electrophoresis methods that can separate
fragments over 30 kb in length. The development
of modern vectors and cloning strategies has simplified library construction to the point where many
workers now prefer to create a new library for each
screening, but pre-made libraries are available from
many commercial sources and the same companies
often offer custom library services. These libraries are

red+

gam+

14 kb

Sac I
Xba I
N

C II

J

cro

A

Xba I
EcoRI
XhoI
SalI

Xba I
Sac I

Fig. 6.4 The replacement vectors
λDASH and λFIX. Promoters specific
for the bacteriophage T3 and T7 RNA
polymerases are located adjacent to the
cloning sites, allowing RNA probes to be
generated that correspond to each end
of the insert.

T3
SalI
XhoI
EcoRI
Xba I

T7

O P QS R

9 kb

λFIX

often of high quality and such services are becoming
increasingly popular. The highest capacity vectors –
BACs, PACs, and YACs – would seem to be ideal for
library construction because of the very large insert
sizes. However, such libraries are generally more
difficult to prepare, and the larger inserts can be less
than straightforward to work with. The main application of BAC, PAC, and YAC libraries is for genome
mapping, sequencing, and the assembly of clone
contigs.

The PCR can be used as an alternative to
genomic DNA cloning
The PCR is a robust technique for amplifying specific
DNA sequences from complex sources. In principle,
therefore, PCR with specific primers could be used to
isolate genes directly from genomic DNA, obviating
the need for the production of genomic libraries.
However, a serious limitation is that standard PCR
conditions are suitable only for the amplification of
short products. The maximum product size that can
be obtained is about 5 kb, although the typical size is
more likely to be 1–2 kb. This reflects the poor processivity of PCR enzymes such as Taq polymerase,
and their lack of proofreading activity. Both of these
deficiencies increase the likelihood of the enzyme
detaching from the template, especially if the template
is long. The extreme reaction conditions required
for the PCR are also thought to cause damage to
bases and generate nicks in DNA strands, increasing
the probability of premature termination on long
templates.

102

CHAPTER 6

Long PCR uses a mixture of enzymes to
amplify long DNA templates
Modifications to reaction conditions can improve
polymerase processivity by lowering the reaction
temperature and increasing the pH, thereby protecting the template from damage (Foord & Rose 1994).
The use of such conditions in combination with two
DNA polymerases, one of which is a proofreading
enzyme, has been shown to dramatically improve
the performance of the PCR using long templates
(Barnes 1994, Cheng et al. 1994a). Essentially, the
improvements come about because the proofreading
enzyme removes mismatched bases that are often
incorporated into growing DNA strands by enzymes
such as Taq polymerase. Under normal conditions,
Taq polymerase would stall at these obstructions,
and lacking the intrinsic proofreading activity to correct them, the reaction would most likely be aborted.
Using such polymerase mixtures, it has been
possible to amplify DNA fragments of up to 22 kb
directly from human genomic DNA, almost the
entire 16.6-kb human mitochondrial genome and
the complete or near complete genomes of several
viruses, including 42 kb of the 45-kb phage λ
genome (Cheng et al. 1994a, b). Several commercial
companies now provide cocktails of enzymes suitable for long PCR, e.g. TaqPlus Long PCR system,
marketed by Stratagene, which is essentially a mixture of Taq polymerase and the thermostable proofreading enzyme Pfu polymerase. The technique has
been applied to the structural analysis of human
genes (e.g. Ruzzo et al. 1998, Bochmann et al. 1999),
and viral genomes, including HIV (Dittmar et al.
1997). Long PCR has particular diagnostic value
for the analysis of human triplet repeat disorders,
such as Friedreich’s ataxia (Lamont et al. 1997).
However, while long PCR is useful for the isolation
of genes where sequence information is already
available, it is unlikely to replace the use of genomic
libraries since the latter represent a permanent, fullgenome resource that can be shared by numerous
laboratories. Indeed, genomic libraries may be used
in preference to total genomic DNA as the starting
point for gene isolation by long PCR.
Fragment libraries can be prepared from
material that is unsuitable for conventional
library cloning
Traditional genomic libraries cannot be prepared
from small amounts of starting material, e.g. single

cells, or from problematical sources such as fixed
tissue. In these cases, the PCR is the only available
strategy for gene isolation. However, as well as being
useful for the isolation of specific fragments, the PCR
can be used to generate libraries, i.e. by amplifying a
representative collection of random genomic fragments. This can be achieved either using random
primers followed by size selection for suitable PCR
products, or a strategy in which genomic DNA is
digested with restriction enzymes and then linkers
are ligated to the ends of the DNA fragments providing annealing sites for one specific type of primer
(e.g. Cheung & Nelson 1996, Zhang et al. 1992).
These techniques are powerful because they allow
genomic fragment libraries to be prepared from
material that could not yield DNA of suitable quality
or quantity for conventional library construction,
but until recently competition among the templates
generally has not allowed the production of truly
representative libraries.
This problem has been addressed in a strategy
called whole-genome amplification, in which the
entire genome is amplified by PCR without any
bias towards particular sequences (Lasken & Egholm
2003). Although several PCR-based techniques have
been developed (p. 34) they produce short fragments
which have limited usefulness. A more recent development called multiple displacement amplification
(MDA) involves a branching reaction and utilizes the
high-fidelity and highly processive DNA polymerase
from bacteriophage φ29. The product length is usually between 20 kb and 200 kb, which is suitable for
genomic library construction, and the bias between
loci is less than one order of magnitude, while those
of PCR-based techniques range from 103 to 106. The
principle of MDA is explained on p. 34.

Complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries are
generated by the reverse transcription
of mRNA
cDNA is representative of the mRNA
population, and therefore reflects mRNA
levels and the diversity of splice isoforms in
particular tissues
Complementary DNA (cDNA) is prepared by reverse
transcribing cellular mRNA. Cloned eukaryotic
cDNAs have their own special uses, which derive from
the fact that they lack introns and other non-coding
sequences present in the corresponding genomic

103

Gene-cloning strategies

DNA. Introns are rare in bacteria but occur in most
genes of higher eukaryotes. They can be situated
within the coding sequence itself, where they then
interrupt the colinear relationship of the gene and
its encoded polypeptide, or they may occur in the 5′
or 3′ untranslated regions. In any event, they are
copied by RNA polymerase when the gene is transcribed. The primary transcript goes through a series
of processing events in the nucleus before appearing
in the cytoplasm as mature mRNA. These events
include the removal of intron sequences by a process
called splicing. In mammals, some genes contain
numerous large introns that represent the vast
majority of the sequence. For example, the human
dystrophin gene contains 79 introns, representing
over 99% of the sequence. The gene is nearly 2.5 Mb
in length yet the corresponding cDNA is only just
over 11 kb. Thus, one advantage of cDNA cloning
is that in many cases the size of the cDNA clone is
significantly lower than that of the corresponding
genomic clone. Since removal of eukaryotic intron
transcripts by splicing does not occur in bacteria,
eukaryotic cDNA clones find application where bacterial expression of the foreign DNA is necessary,
either as a prerequisite for detecting the clone (see
p. 116), or because expression of the polypeptide
product is the primary objective. Also, where the
sequence of the genomic DNA is available, the position of intron/exon boundaries can be assigned by
comparison with the cDNA sequence.
Under some circumstances, it may be possible
to prepare cDNA directly from a purified mRNA
species. Much more commonly a cDNA library is
prepared by reverse transcribing a population of
mRNAs, and then screening for particular clones.
An important concept is that the cDNA library is
representative of the RNA population from which
it was derived. Thus, whereas genomic libraries are
Table 6.2
Abundance classes
of typical mRNA
populations.

Source

essentially the same regardless of the cell type or
developmental stage from which the DNA was isolated, the contents of cDNA libraries will vary widely
according to these parameters. A given cDNA library
will also be enriched for abundant mRNAs but may
contain only a few clones representing rare mRNAs.
Furthermore, where a gene is differentially spliced, a
cDNA library will contain different clones representing alternative splice variants.
Table 6.2 shows the abundances of different classes
of mRNAs in two representative tissues. Generally,
mRNAs can be described as abundant, moderately
abundant, or rare. Notice that in the chicken oviduct,
one mRNA type is superabundant. This encodes
ovalbumin, the major egg-white protein. Therefore,
the starting population is naturally so enriched in
ovalbumin mRNA that isolating the ovalbumin cDNA
can be achieved without the use of a library. An
appropriate strategy for obtaining such abundant
cDNAs is to clone them directly in an M13 vector
such as M13mp8. A set of clones can then be
sequenced immediately and identified on the basis
of the polypeptide that each encodes. A successful
demonstration of this strategy was reported by
Putney et al. (1983), who determined DNA sequences
of 178 randomly chosen muscle cDNA clones. Based
on the amino acid sequences available for 19 abundant muscle-specific proteins, they were able to identify clones corresponding to 13 of these 19 proteins,
including several protein variants.
For the isolation of cDNA clones in the moderate
and low abundance classes it is usually necessary
to construct a cDNA library. Once again the high
efficiency obtained by packaging in vitro makes phage
λ vectors attractive for obtaining large numbers of
cDNA clones. λ insertion vectors are particularly
well suited for cDNA cloning and some of the most
widely used vectors are discussed in Box 6.1.

Number of
different mRNAs

Abundance
(molecules/cell)

Mouse liver cytoplasmic poly(A)+

1
9
2
700
3 11,500

12,000
300
15

Chick oviduct polysomal poly(A)+

1
1
2
7
3 12,500

100,000
4,000
5

References: mouse (Young et al. 1976); chick oviduct (Axel et al. 1976).

104

CHAPTER 6

Box 6.1 Phage-l vectors for cDNA cloning and expression
lgt10 and lgt11
Most early cDNA libraries were constructed
using plasmid vectors, and were difficult to
store and maintain for long periods. They
were largely replaced by phage-l libraries,
which can be stored indefinitely and can also
be prepared to much higher titers. lgt10 and
lgt11 were the standard vectors for cDNA
cloning until about 1990. Both lgt10 and
lgt11 are insertion vectors, and they can
accept approximately 7.6 kb and 7.2 kb of
foreign DNA, respectively. In each case, the
foreign DNA is introduced at a unique EcoRI
cloning site. lgt10 is used to make libraries
that are screened by hybridization. The
EcoRI site interrupts the phage cI gene,
allowing selection on the basis of plaque
morphology. lgt11 contains an E. coli lacZ
gene driven by the lac promoter. If inserted

in the correct orientation and reading
frame, cDNA sequences cloned in this
vector can be expressed as b-galactosidase
fusion proteins, and can be detected by
immunological screening or screening with
other ligands (see p. 117). lgt11 libraries can
also be screened by hybridization, although
lgt10 is more appropriate for this screening
strategy because higher titers are possible.
lZAP series
While phage-l vectors generate better
libraries, they cannot be manipulated in
vitro with the convenience of plasmid vectors.
Therefore, phage clones have to be laboriously
subcloned back into plasmids for further
analysis. This limitation of conventional
phage-l vectors has been addressed by the
development of hybrids, sometimes called
T3

I

T7

pBluescript

T

cos

cos

f1 origin
T
Ampr

I

LacZ′

ColE1ori
T7

T3

Fig. B6.1 Linear phage map of the prototype λZAP vector with the circular map of the excised pBluescript plasmid shown
below it.
continued

Gene-cloning strategies

Box 6.1
phasmids, which possess the most attractive
features of both bacteriophage l and plasmids
(see Chapter 5). The most popular current
vectors for cDNA cloning are undoubtedly
those of the lZAP series marketed by
Stratagene (Short et al. 1988). A map of the
original lZAP vector is shown opposite. The
advantageous features of this vector are:
(i) the high capacity – up to 10 kb of foreign
DNA can be cloned, which is large enough
to encompass most cDNAs; (ii) the presence
of a polylinker with six unique restriction sites,
which increases cloning versatility and also
allows directional cloning; and (iii) the
availability of T3 and T7 RNA polymerase
sites flanking the polylinker, allowing sense
and antisense RNA to be prepared from the
insert. Most importantly, all these features

Typically, 105 clones is sufficient for the isolation of
low-abundance mRNAs from most cell types, i.e. those
present at 15 molecules per cell or above. However,
some mRNAs are even less abundant than this, and
may be further diluted if they are expressed in only a
few specific cells in a particular tissue. Under these
circumstances it may be worth enriching the mRNA
preparation prior to library construction, e.g. by size
fractionation, and testing the fractions for the presence of the desired molecule. One way in which this
can be achieved is to inject mRNA fractions into
Xenopus oocytes (p. 266) and test them for production of the corresponding protein (Melton 1987). See
also the discussion of subtraction cloning on p. 122.
The first stage of cDNA library construction is
the synthesis of double-stranded DNA using
mRNA as the template
The synthesis of double-stranded cDNA suitable for
insertion into a cloning vector involves three major
steps: (1) first-strand DNA synthesis on the mRNA
template, carried out with a reverse transcriptase; (2)
removal of the RNA template; and (3) second-strand
DNA synthesis using the first DNA strand as a template,
carried out with a DNA-dependent DNA polymerase
such as E. coli DNA polymerase I. All DNA polymerases, whether they use RNA or DNA as the template,
require a primer to initiate strand synthesis.

105

continued
are included within a plasmid vector called
pBluescript, which is itself inserted into the
phage genome. Thus the cDNA clone can be
recovered from the phage and propagated as
a high-copy-number plasmid without any
subcloning, simply by coinfecting the bacteria
with a helper f1 phage that nicks the lZAP
vector at the flanks of the plasmid and
facilitates excision. Another member of this
series, lZAP Express, also includes the human
cytomegalovirus promoter and SV40
terminator, so that fusion proteins can be
expressed in mammalian cells as well as
bacteria. Thus, cDNA libraries can be cloned in
the phage vector in E. coli, rescued as plasmids
and then transfected into mammalian cells for
expression cloning.

The first reports of cDNA cloning were published
in the mid-1970s, and were all based on the homopolymer tailing technique, which is described briefly
in Chapter 3. Of several alternative methods, the one
that became the most popular was that of Maniatis
et al. (1976). This involved the use of an oligo-dT
primer annealing at the polyadenylate tail of the
mRNA to prime first-strand cDNA synthesis, and took
advantage of the fact that the first cDNA strand has
the tendency to transiently fold back on itself, forming
a hairpin loop, resulting in self-priming of the second
strand (Efstratiadis et al. 1976). After the synthesis of
the second DNA strand, this loop must be cleaved with
a single-strand-specific nuclease, e.g. S1 nuclease, to
allow insertion into the cloning vector (Fig. 6.5).
A serious disadvantage of the hairpin method is
that cleavage with S1 nuclease results in the loss of a
certain amount of sequence at the 5′ end of the clone.
This strategy has therefore been superseded by other
methods in which the second strand is primed in a
separate reaction. One of the simplest strategies is
shown in Fig. 6.6 (Land et al. 1981). After first-strand
synthesis, which is primed with an oligo-dT primer
as usual, the cDNA is tailed with a string of cytidine
residues using the enzyme terminal transferase. This
artificial oligo-dC tail is then used as an annealing
site for a synthetic oligo-dG primer, allowing synthesis of the second strand. Using this method, Land
et al. (1981) were able to isolate a full-length cDNA

106

CHAPTER 6

mRNA

5’

AAAn 3’

Oligo (dT)
AAAn 3’
TTTn

5’

TcR

PstI

(1) Reverse
transcriptase
(2) Alkali

pBR322
ApR
First strand synthesis
cDNA

TTTn 5’
3’

PstI
Second strand synthesis

G
3’ ACGTC

DNA polymerase
+ 4 dNTPs
5’
3’
S1-nuclease

CTGCA 3’
G
3’

Terminal
transferase
+ dGTP
G
GGnGACGTC

Terminal
transferase
+ dCTP

CTGCAGGnG
G

3’

CCnC
CCnC
Annealing

cDNA
G
CCnC
CTGCAGGnG

GGnGACGTC
CCnG
G

Select
TcR, ApS
GACGTCCnC
CTGCAGGnG

Transformation host repairs
gaps, reconstructs PstI sites
GGnGACGTC
CCnCTGCAG

corresponding to the chicken lysozyme gene. However, the efficiency can be lower for other cDNAs
(e.g. Cooke et al. 1980).
For cDNA expression libraries, it is advantageous
if the cDNA can be inserted into the vector in the
correct orientation. With the self-priming method,
this can be achieved by adding a synthetic linker
to the double-stranded cDNA molecule before the
hairpin loop is cleaved (e.g. Kurtz & Nicodemus
1981; Fig. 6.7a). Where the second strand is primed
separately, direction cloning can be achieved using
a oligo-dT primer containing a linker sequence (e.g.
Coleclough & Erlitz; Fig. 6.7b). An alternative is to
use primers for cDNA synthesis that are already

Fig. 6.5 An early
cDNA cloning strategy,
involving hairpinprimed second-strand
DNA synthesis and
homopolymer tailing
to insert the cDNA into
the vector.

linked to a plasmid (Fig. 6.7c). This strategy was
devised by Okayama & Berg (1982) and has two further notable characteristics. First, full-length cDNAs
are preferentially obtained because an RNA–DNA
hybrid molecule, the result of first-strand synthesis,
is the substrate for a terminal transferase reaction. A
cDNA that does not extend to the end of the mRNA
will present a shielded 3-hydroxyl group, which is a
poor substrate for tailing. Second, the second-strand
synthesis step is primed by nicking the RNA at multiple sites with RNase H. Second-strand synthesis
therefore occurs by a nick-translation type of reaction, which is highly efficient. Simpler cDNA cloning
strategies incorporating replacement synthesis of the

Gene-cloning strategies

5‘

mRNA

A A A A 3‘
Oligo-dT
Reverse transcriptase
+ 4 dNTPs

First strand synthesis
5‘
3‘

mRNA
cDNA

A A A A 3‘
T T T T 5‘

Terminal transferase
+ dCTP

5‘
3‘ C C C C

mRNA
cDNA

A A A A CCC

3‘

TTT

5‘

Alkaline sucrose gradient:
(1) hydrolyzes RNA
(2) recovers full length cDNA
3‘ C C C C

cDNA

T T T T 5‘

Oligo-dG, reverse transcriptase
+ 4 dNTPs
Second strand synthesis
5‘

GGG

3‘

3‘ C C C C

T T T T 5‘

duplex cDNA

Insert into vector by
either further homopolymer
tailing or linkers

Fig. 6.6 Improved method for cDNA cloning. The first
strand is tailed with oligo(dC) allowing the second strand to
be initiated using an oligo(dG) primer.

second strand are widely used (e.g. Gubbler &
Hoffman 1983, Lapeyre & Amalric 1985). The
Gubbler–Hoffman reaction, as it is commonly
known, is show in Fig. 6.8.
Obtaining full-length cDNA for cloning can be
a challenge
Conventional approaches to the production of cDNA
libraries have two major drawbacks. First, where
oligo-dT primers are used to initiate first-strand synthesis, there is generally a 3′-end bias (preferential
recovery of clones representing the 3′ end of cDNA
sequences) in the resulting library. This can be addressed through the use of random oligonucleotide
primers, usually hexamers, for both first- and second-

107

strand cDNA synthesis. However, while this eliminates 3′ end bias in library construction, the resulting clones are much smaller, such that full-length
cDNAs must be assembled from several shorter
fragments. Second, as the size of a cDNA increases, it
becomes progressively more difficult to isolate fulllength clones. This is partly due to deficiencies in the
reverse transcriptase enzymes used for first-strand
cDNA synthesis. The enzymes are usually purified
from avian myelobastosis virus (AMV) or produced
from a cloned Moloney murine leukemia virus (MuLV)
gene in E. coli. Native enzymes have poor processivity and intrinsic RNase activity, which leads to degradation of the RNA template (Champoux 1995).
Several companies produce engineered murine
reverse transcriptases that lack RNase H activity,
and these are more efficient in the production of
full-length cDNAs (Gerard & D’Allesio 1993). An
example is the enzyme SuperScript II, marketed
by Life Technologies (Kotewicz et al. 1988). This
enzyme can also carry out reverse transcription at
temperatures of up to 50°C. The native enzymes
function optimally at 37°C, and therefore tend to
stall at sequences that are rich in secondary structure, as often found in 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions.
Despite improvements in reverse transcriptases,
the generation of full-length clones corresponding
to large mRNAs remains a problem. This has been
addressed by the development of cDNA cloning
strategies involving the selection of mRNAs with
intact 5′ ends. Nearly all eukaryotic mRNAs have
a 5′ end cap, a specialized, methylated guanidine
residue that is inverted with respect to the rest of the
strand and is recognized by the ribosome prior to the
initiation of protein synthesis. Using a combination
of cap selection and nuclease treatment, it is possible
to select for full-length first-strand cDNAs, and thus
generate libraries highly enriched in full-length
clones.
An example of the above is the method described
by Edery et al. (1995) (Fig. 6.9). In this strategy, firststrand cDNA synthesis is initiated as usual, using an
oligo-dT primer. Following the synthesis reaction,
the hybrid molecules are treated with RNase A,
which only digests single-stranded RNA. DNA–RNA
hybrids therefore remain intact. If the first-strand
cDNA is full length, it reaches all the way to the 5′
cap of the mRNA, which is therefore protected from
cleavage by RNase A. However, part-length cDNAs
will leave a stretch of unprotected single-stranded
RNA between the end of the double-stranded region
and the cap, which is digested away with the

108

CHAPTER 6

(b)

(a)
mRNA

5‘
5′

A A An 3′
3‘

5′

A A An
T T Tn

5′

mRNA

Add oligo-dT primer with SalI site

Oligo-dT
5‘
5′

A A A... 3′
A A An
T T Tn

Reverse transcriptase + 4 dNTPs

(1) Reverse transcriptase + 4dNTPs
(2) Alkali
First strand synthesis

A A An
T T Tn

T T Tn 5′
5‘

cDNA

3‘
3′

DNA polymerase (Klenow) + 4 dNTPs

DNA polymerase (Klenow) + 4dNTPs
Second strand synthesis

AAA
S
TTT
EcoRI linkers

SalI-linkers, ligation

AAA
S
TTT
Cut with SalI, EcoRI

R

S S S
(1) Nuclease S1
(2) DNA polymerase (Klenow)
+ 4dNTPs

R

AAA
S
TTT

R
Insert into vector

S S S
EcoRI-linkers, ligation
R R

S S S R R
Cut with SalI, EcoRI

R

S

Insert into vector cut with SalI and EcoRI

(c)
mRNA
– – – – – – –AAAAAA
HindIII
AmpR

T
T
T
T

CC
Annealing
cDNA
synthesis

PvuII First strand
synthesis

OligodC tails

A
T AA
T
T A
T
PvuII

HindIII

C
CC

C

A
T AA
T
T A
T

HindIII
digestion

HindIII

Primer
Annealing of oligo-dG
tailed adaptor;
HindIII
cyclization with
E. coli DNA ligase
G
G
PstI G CC
C
HindIII

A
T A
T
TA
TA
PvuII

Second strand
synthesis

PstI
GG
G

Replacement of
RNA strand by
DNA with E. coli
RNase H, DNA
polymerase I and
DNA ligase

CCC
G
G C
G C
C

A
T A
T
TA
TA

HindIIIC
C
HindIII

C

A
T AA
T
T A
T
PvuII

HindIII

Fig. 6.7 Methods for directional cDNA cloning. (a) An early strategy in which the formation of a loop is exploited to place a
specific linker (in this example, for SalI) at the open end of the duplex cDNA. Following this ligation, the loop is cleaved and
trimmed with S1 nuclease and EcoR1 linkers are added to both ends. Cleavage with EcoR1 and SalI generates a restriction
fragment that can be unidirectionally inserted into a vector cleaved with the same enzymes. (b) A similar strategy, but secondstrand cDNA synthesis is random-primed. The oligo(dT) primer carries an extension forming a SalI site. During second-strand
synthesis, this forms a double-stranded SalI linker. The addition of further EcoRI linkers to both ends allows the cDNA to be
unidirectionally cloned, as above. (c) The strategy of Okayama & Berg (1982), where the mRNA is linked unidirectionally
to the plasmid cloning vector prior to cDNA synthesis, by virtue of a cDNA tail.

109

Gene-cloning strategies

A A A An

mRNA

A A A An
T T T Tn

mRNA
cDNA

Reverse transcriptase
+ 4 dNTPs
A A A An
T T T Tn

mRNA
cDNA

Oligo (dT)

RNAseH
random primers
DNA polymerase
T T T Tn

cDNA

A A A An
T T T Tn

duplex
cDNA

Fig. 6.8 The Gubbler–Hoffman method, a simple and
general method for non-directional cDNA cloning. Firststrand synthesis is primed using an oligo(dT) primer. When
the first strand is complete, the RNA is removed with RNase
H and the second strand is random-primed and synthesized
with DNA polymerase I. T4 DNA polymerase is used to
ensure that the molecule is blunt-ended prior to insertion
into the vector.

enzyme. In the next stage of the procedure, the
eukaryotic translational initiation factor eIF-4E is
used to isolate full-length molecules by affinity capture. Incomplete cDNAs and cDNAs synthesized on
broken templates will lack the cap, and will not be
retained. A similar method based on the biotinylation of mRNA has also been reported (Caminci et al.
1996). Both methods, however, also co-purify
cDNAs resulting from the mispriming of first-strand
synthesis, which can account for up to 10% of the
clones in a library. An alternative method, oligo-capping, addresses this problem by performing selection
at the RNA stage (Maruyama & Sugano 1994,
Suzuki et al. 1997, Suzuki et al. 2000; Fig. 6.10). The
basis of the method is that RNA is sequentially
treated with the enzymes alkaline phosphatase and

Oligo-capping
Full-length mRNA cap
Partial-length mRNA

AAAAAAA

P

AAAAAAA

BAP treatment
cap

AAAAAAA

OH
cap

AAA

AAAAAAA

TAP treatment

First strand
cDNA synthesis

P

Full
length
cDNA

AAAAAAA

OH

cap

Partial
length
cDNA

AAA
TTT

RNAse A
treatment

cap

cap

AAA
TTT

Oligo capped
mRNA

AAAAAAA

OH

RNAse A
treatment

AAA
TTT

Isolation on
elF-4E affinity
column

AAAAAAA

Oligo plus RNA
ligase

AAAAAAA

First strand
synthesis
AAAAAAA
TTTTTTT

AAA
TTT

OH

AAAAAAA
TTTTTTT

melf-4E
A

cap

AAA
TTT

PCR amplification and cloning
(only molecules containing both
primers will be amplified)
AAAAAAA
TTTTTTT

Elute full length cDNA

Fig. 6.9 The CAPture method of full-length cDNA cloning,
using the eukaryotic initiation factor eIF-4E to select mRNAs
with caps protected from RNase digestion by a
complementary DNA strand.

Fig. 6.10 Oligo-capping, the addition of specific
oligonucleotide primers to full-length RNAs by
sequential treatment with alkaline phosphatase and
acid pyrophosphatase. Once the oligo cap has annealed to
the 5′ end of the mRNA, it can serve as a primer binding
site for PCR amplification.

110

CHAPTER 6

acid pyrophosphatase. The first enzyme removes
phosphate groups from the 5′ ends of uncapped RNA
molecules, but does not affect full-length molecules
with a 5′ cap. The second treatment removes the cap
from full-length RNAs leaving a 5′ terminal residue
with a phosphate group. Full-length molecules can
be ligated to a specific oligo-nucleotide, while broken
and degraded molecules cannot. The result is an
oligo-capped population of full-length mRNAs. This
selected population is then reverse transcribed using
an oligo-dT primer. Second-strand synthesis and cloning is then carried out by the PCR using the oligo-dT
primer and a primer annealing to the oligonucleotide
cap. Only full-length cDNAs annealing to both primers
will be amplified, thus eliminating broken or degraded
RNAs, incomplete first cDNA strands (which lack a
5′ primer annealing site), and misprimed cDNAs
(which lack a 3′ primer annealing site).

The PCR can be used as an alternative
to cDNA cloning
Reverse transcription followed by the polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) leads to the amplification of
RNA sequences in cDNA form. No modification to
the basic PCR strategy (p. 26) is required, except that
the template for PCR amplification is generated in
the same reaction tube in a prior reverse transcription reaction (see Kawasaki 1990, Dieffenbach &
Dvesler 1995). Using gene-specific primers, RT-PCR
is a sensitive means for detecting, quantifying, and
cloning specific cDNA molecules. Reverse transcription is carried out using a specific 3′ primer that
generates the first cDNA strand, and then PCR
amplification is initiated following the addition of a
5′ primer to the reaction mix. The sensitivity is such
that total RNA can be used as the starting material,
rather than the poly(A)+ RNA which is used for conventional cDNA cloning. Total RNA also contains
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA),
which can be present in a great excess to mRNA.
Due to the speed with which RT-PCR can be
carried out, it is an attractive approach for obtaining
a specific cDNA sequence for cloning. In contrast,
screening a cDNA library is laborious, even presuming that a suitable cDNA library is already available
and does not have to be constructed for the purpose.
Quite apart from the labor involved, a cDNA library
may not yield a cDNA clone with a full-length coding
region because, as described above, generating a fulllength cDNA clone may be technically challenging,

particularly with respect to long mRNAs. Furthermore, the sought-after cDNA may be very rare even
in specialized libraries. Does this mean that cDNA
libraries have been superseded? Despite the advantages of RT-PCR, there are still reasons for constructing cDNA libraries. The first reflects the availability
of starting material, and the permanence of the
library. A sought-after mRNA may occur in a source
that is not readily available, perhaps a small number
of cells in a particular human tissue. A good-quality
cDNA library has only to be constructed once from
this tissue to give a virtually infinite resource for
future use. The specialized library is permanently
available for screening. Indeed, the library may be
used as a source from which a specific cDNA can
be obtained by PCR amplification. The second reason concerns screening strategies. The PCR-based
approaches are dependent upon specific primers.
However, with cDNA libraries, screening strategies
are possible that are based upon expression, e.g. immunochemical screening, rather than nucleic acid
hybridization (see below).
As discussed above for genomic libraries, PCR
can be used to provide the DNA for library construction when the source is unsuitable for conventional
approaches, e.g. a very small amount of starting
material or fixed tissue. Instead of gene-specific
primers, universal primers can be used that lead
to the amplification of all mRNAs, which can then
be subcloned into suitable vectors. A disadvantage
of PCR-based strategies for cDNA library construction is that the DNA polymerases used for PCR are
more error-prone than those used conventionally for
second-strand synthesis, so the library may contain
a large number of mutations. There is also likely to
be a certain amount of distortion due to competition among templates, and a bias towards shorter
cDNAs.
A potential problem with RT-PCR is false results
resulting from the amplification of contaminating
genomic sequences in the RNA preparation. Even
trace amounts of genomic DNA may be amplified.
In the study of eukaryotic mRNAs, it is therefore
desirable to choose primers that anneal in different
exons such that the products expected from the
amplification of cDNA and genomic DNA would be
different sizes, or if the intron is suitably large, so
that genomic DNA would not be amplified at all.
Where this is not possible (e.g. when bacterial RNA is
used as the template), the RNA can be treated with
DNase prior to amplification to destroy any contaminating DNA.

Gene-cloning strategies

Full-length cDNA cloning is facilitated by the
rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE)
Another way to address the problem of incomplete
cDNA sequences in libraries is to use a PCR-based
technique for the rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(RACE) (Frohman et al. 1988). Both 5′ RACE and 3′
RACE protocols are available, although 3′ RACE is
usually only required if cDNAs have been generated
using random primers. In each case only limited
knowledge of the mRNA sequence is required. A single
stretch of sequence within the mRNA is sufficient, so
an incomplete clone from a cDNA library is a good
starting point. From this sequence, specific primers
are chosen which face outwards, and which produce
overlapping cDNA fragments. In the two RACE protocols, extension of the cDNAs from the ends of the
transcript to the specific primers is accomplished by
using primers that hybridize either at the natural 3′
poly(A) tail of the mRNA, or at a synthetic poly(dA)
tract added to the 5′ end of the first-strand cDNA
(Fig. 6.11). Finally, after amplification, the overlapping RACE products can be combined if desired, to
produce an intact full-length cDNA.
Although simple in principle, RACE suffers from
the same limitations that affect conventional cDNA
cloning procedures. In 5′ RACE, for example, the
reverse transcriptase may not, in many cases, reach
the authentic 5′ end of the mRNA, but all first-strand
cDNAs whether full length or truncated, are tailed in
the subsequent reaction, leading to the amplification
of a population of variable-length products. Furthermore, as might be anticipated, since only a single
specific primer is used in each of the RACE protocols,
the specificity of amplification may not be very high.
This is especially problematical where the specific
primer is degenerate. In order to overcome this
problem, a modification of the RACE method has
been devised which is based on using nested primers
to increase specificity (Frohman & Martin 1989).
Strategies for improving the specificity of RACE have
been reviewed (Schaefer 1995, Chen 1996).

Many different strategies are available for
library screening
The identification of a specific clone from a DNA
library can be carried out by exploiting either the
sequence of the clone or the structure/function of
its expressed product. The former applies to any type
of library, genomic or cDNA, and can involve either

111

nucleic acid hybridization or the PCR. In each case,
the design of the probe or primers can be used to
home in on one specific clone or a group of structurally related clones. Note that PCR screening can
also be used to isolate DNA sequences from uncloned
genomic DNA and cDNA. Screening the product of a
clone applies only to expression libraries, i.e. libraries
where the DNA fragment is expressed to yield a protein. In this case, the clone can be identified because
its product is recognized by an antibody, or a ligand
of some nature, or because the biological activity of
the protein is preserved and can be assayed in an
appropriate test system.
Both genomic and cDNA libraries can be
screened by hybridization
Nucleic acid hybridization is the most commonly
used method of library screening because it is rapid,
it can be applied to very large numbers of clones, and
in the case of cDNA libraries, can be used to identify
clones that are not full length (and therefore cannot
be expressed).
Grunstein & Hogness (1975) developed a screening procedure to detect DNA sequences in transformed
colonies by hybridization in situ with radioactive
RNA probes. Their procedure can rapidly determine
which colony among thousands contains the target
sequence. A modification of the method allows
screening of colonies plated at a very high density
(Hanahan & Meselson 1980). The colonies to be
screened are first replica plated onto a nitrocellulose
filter disk that has been placed on the surface of an
agar plate prior to inoculation (Fig. 6.12). A reference set of these colonies on the master plate is
retained. The filter bearing the colonies is removed
and treated with alkali so that the bacterial colonies
are lysed and the DNA they contain is denatured.
The filter is then treated with proteinase K to remove
protein and leave denatured DNA bound to the
nitrocellulose, for which it has a high affinity, in the
form of a “DNA-print” of the colonies. The DNA is
fixed firmly by baking the filter at 80°C. The defining,
labeled RNA is hybridized to this DNA and the result
of this hybridization is monitored by autoradiography. A colony whose DNA print gives a positive
autoradiographic result can then be picked from the
reference plate.
Variations of this procedure can be applied to
phage plaques ( Jones & Murray 1975, Kramer et al.
1976). Benton & Davis (1977) devised a method
called plaque lift in which the nitrocellulose filter is

112

CHAPTER 6

RACE: 3‘ end

RACE: 5‘ end

mRNA
cDNA

AAAAAAAAAA

mRNA

T T T T **
**

cDNA

(−) strand

PCR

Denature
Anneal primer
Extend

AAAAAAAAAA
(–) strand

Remove excess 5RT primer
Tail cDNAs with dATP
3‘ amp

AAAAAAAAAA
3‘ amp

5RT

(–) strand

5RT

(+) strand
PCR

(–) strand

Denature
Anneal primer **** T T T T
Extend

T T T T ****
Denature
Anneal primer ****
Extend

***

* TTTT

(+) strand

AAAAAAAAAA
3‘ amp

(+) strand
TR (–) strand

(–) strand
Denature
Anneal primer
Extend

****

5RT

5‘ amp

Denature
Anneal primers:

Up to ~106
copies of cDNA

TR (+) strand

**** T T T T

3‘ amp and ****
Extend

TR (–) strand

3‘ amp

Denature
Anneal primer ****
Extend

(+) strand
TR (–) strand

5‘ amp

****
****

TR (+) strand
TR (–) strand

3‘ amp
Denature
Anneal primers:
**** and 5‘ amp
Extend

****

Up to ~106
copies of cDNA

TR (+) strand
TR (–) strand

5‘ amp

Fig. 6.11 Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) (Frohman et al. 1988). 3′ Protocol. The mRNA is reverse transcribed using
an oligo(dT17) primer which has a 17 nucleotide extension at its 5′ end. This extension, the anchor sequence, is designed to
contain restriction sites for subsequent cloning. Amplification is performed using the anchor 17-mer (which has a Tm higher than
oligo(dT17)) and a primer specific for the sought-after cDNA. 5′ Protocol. The mRNA is reverse transcribed from a specific primer.
The resultant cDNA is then extended by terminal transferase to create a poly(dA) tail at the 3′ end of the cDNA. Amplification is
performed with the oligo(dT17)/anchor system as used for the 3′ protocol, and the specific primer. Open boxes represent DNA
strands being synthesized; colored boxes represent DNA from a previous step. The diagram is simplified to show only how the
new product from a previous step is used. Molecules designated TR, truncated, are shorter than full-length (+) or (−) strands.

113

Gene-cloning strategies

Replica plate onto
nitrocellulose disk
placed on agar in
Petri plate
Incubate

Transformant colonies growing
on agar surface

Retain master
plate

Nitrocellulose disk
removed

Reference
set of
colonies
Pick
positive
colony

(1) Lyse bacteria with 0.5N NaOH
(2) Neutralize
(3) Proteinase
(4) Wash
(5) Bake at 80°C

Fig. 6.12 Grunstein–Hogness
method for detection of recombinant
clones by colony hybridization.

(1) Hybridize with
32
P-labeled probe
(2) Autoradiography
DNA print

applied to the upper surface of agar plates, making direct contact between plaques and filter. The
plaques contain phage particles as well as a considerable amount of unpackaged recombinant DNA. Both
phage and unpackaged DNA bind to the filter and
can be denatured, fixed, and hybridized. This method
has the advantage that several identical DNA prints
can easily be made from a single-phage plate: this
allows the screening to be performed in duplicate,
and hence with increased reliability, and also allows
a single set of recombinants to be screened with two
or more probes. The Benton and Davis procedure is
probably the most widely applied method of library
screening, successfully applied in thousands of laboratories to the isolation of recombinant phage by
nucleic acid hybridization (Fig. 6.13). More recently,
however, library presentation and screening have
become increasingly automated. Box 6.2 considers
the advantages of gridded reference libraries.
In place of RNA probes, DNA or synthetic oligonucleotide probes can be used. A number of alternative labeling methods are also available that avoid
the use of radioactivity. These methods involve the
incorporation of chemical labels into the probe, such

Autoradiograph

as digoxigenin or biotin, which can be detected
with a specific antibody or the ligand streptavidin
respectively.
Probes are designed to maximize the chances
of recovering the desired clone
A great advantage of hybridization for library
screening is that it is extremely versatile. Conditions
can be used in which hybridization is very stringent,
so that only sequences identical to the probe are
identified. This is necessary, for example, to identify
genomic clones corresponding to a specific cDNA, or
to identify overlapping clones in a contig (Chapter
17). Alternatively, less stringent conditions can be
used to identify both identical and related sequences.
This is appropriate where a probe from one species
is being used to isolate a homologous clone from
another species (e.g. see Old et al. 1982). Probes corresponding to a conserved functional domain of a
gene may also cross-hybridize with several different
clones in the same species at lower stringency, and
this can be exploited to identify members of a gene
family. The identification of the vertebrate Hox genes

Plate up to 5 104 recombinant
phage on 9 cm2 square Petri dish
Incubate for 6–8 h (small plaques),
or overnight (if larger plaques desired)
Cool at 4°C for 1h to stiffen top agar
or top agarose

Nitrocellulose sheet

Overlay plaques with nitrocellulose
sheet for 30 s to 2 min
Make reference marks for orientation
of sheet with respect to plate
Lift off sheet carefully

Retain plate
Store at 4°C

Phage particles and
recombinant phage DNA
from plaques bind to
nitrocellulose

(1) Place sheet on filter paper soaked
in alkali to denature DNA
(2) Neutralize on filter paper soaked
in neutral buffer
(3) Bake at 80°C in vacuo
(4) Hybridize with labeled nucleic
acid probe
(5) Wash, autoradiograph, or
otherwise detect label

Autoradiographic
images of
positive plaques

Pick plugs of agar from retained
plate at positions corresponding
to positive plaques
Isolate recombinant phage
In primary screen of densely plated
phage library single plaques will not
be identifiable; therefore pick area,
dilute, repeat

Fig. 6.13 Benton and Davis’
plaque-lift procedure.

Box 6.2 Gridded (arrayed) hybridization reference libraries
Traditionally, library screening by
hybridization involves taking a plaque lift or
colony blot, which generates a replica of the
distribution of clones on an agar plate.
However, an alternative is to individually pick
clones and arrange them on the membrane in
the form of a regular grid. Once a laborious
process, gridding or arraying has been
considerably simplified through the use of
robotics. Machines can be programmed to
pick clones from microtiter dishes and spot
them onto membranes at a high density;
then the membrane can be hybridized with a
radioactive probe as normal. Using traditional
libraries, positive clones are detected by
autoradiography and the X-ray film must be
aligned with the original plates in order to
identify the corresponding plaques. With
gridded libraries, however, positive signals can
be used to obtain sets of coordinates, which
then identify the corresponding clone from
the original microtiter dishes. Since identical
sets of membranes can be easily prepared,

duplicates can be distributed to other
laboratories for screening. These laboratories
can then determine the coordinates of their
positive signals and order the corresponding
clone from the source laboratory. Thus, one
library can serve a number of different users
and all data can be centralized (Zehetner &
Lehrach 1994). Gridded libraries, while
convenient for screening and data sharing,
are more expensive to prepare than traditional
libraries. Therefore, they are often prepared
for high-value libraries with wide applications,
such as genomic libraries cloned in highcapacity P1, BAC, or YAC vectors (Bentley
et al. 1992) and also for valuable cDNA
libraries (Lennon & Lehrach 1991). It is
possible to plate libraries at a density of
one clone per well, although for PACs and
BACs it is more common to pool clones in a
hierarchical manner, so that individual clones
may be identified by successive rounds of
screening on smaller subpools (e.g. Shepherd
et al. 1994, Shepherd & Smoller 1994).

Gene-cloning strategies

provides an example in which cross-species hybridization was used to identify a family of related clones
(Levine et al. 1984). In this case a DNA sequence was
identified that was conserved between the Drosophila
developmental genes fushi tarazu and Antennapedia.
When this sequence, the homeobox, was used to
screen a Southern blot of DNA from other species,
including frogs and humans, several hybridizing
bands were revealed. This led to the isolation of a
number of clones from vertebrate cDNA libraries
representing the large family of Hox genes that play a
central role in animal development.
Hybridization thus has the potential to isolate any
sequence from any library if a probe is available. If a
suitable DNA or RNA probe cannot be obtained from
an existing cloned DNA, an alternative strategy is to
make an oligonucleotide probe by chemical synthesis. This requires some knowledge of the amino acid
sequence of the protein encoded by the target clone.
However, since the genetic code is degenerate (i.e.
most amino acids are specified by more than one
codon) degeneracy must be incorporated into probe
design so that a mixture of probes is made, at least
one variant of which will specifically match the target clone. Amino acid sequences known to include
methionine and tryptophan are particularly valuable because these amino acids are each specified by
a single codon, hence reducing the degeneracy of the
resulting probe. Thus, for example, the oligopeptide
His-Phe-Pro-Phe-Met may be identified and chosen
to provide a probe sequence, in which case 32 different oligonucleotides would be required:

5′

T
T T
T
CA TT CCCTT ATG 3′
C C
C
A
G

These 32 different sequences do not have to be
synthesized individually because it is possible to
perform a mixed addition reaction for each polymerization step. This mixture is then end labeled with a
single isotopic or alternatively labeled nucleotide using
an exchange reaction. This mixed-probe method
was originally devised by Wallace and co-workers
(Suggs et al. 1981). To cover all codon possibilities,
degeneracies of 64-fold (Orkin et al. 1983) or even
256-fold (Bell et al. 1984) have been employed successfully. What length of oligonucleotide is required
for reliable hybridization? Even though 11-mers can
be adequate for Southern blot hybridization (SingerSam et al. 1983) longer probes are necessary for good

115

colony and plaque hybridization. Mixed probes of 14
nucleotides have been successful, although 16-mers
are typical (Singer-Sam et al. 1983).
An alternative strategy is to use a single longer
probe of 40–60 nucleotides. Here the uncertainty at
each codon is largely ignored and instead increased
probe length confers specificity. Such probes are
usually designed to incorporate the most commonly
used codons in the target species, and they may
include the nonstandard base inosine at positions
of high uncertainty because this can pair with all
four conventional bases. Such probes are sometimes
termed guessmers. Hybridization is carried out under
low stringency to allow for the presence of mismatches. This strategy is examined theoretically by
Lathe (1985), and has been applied to sequences
coding for human coagulation factor VIII (Wood
et al. 1984, Toole et al. 1984) and the human insulin
receptor (Ullrich et al. 1985).
The PCR can be used as an alternative to
hybridization for the screening of genomic
and cDNA libraries
The PCR is widely used to isolate specific DNA
sequences from uncloned genomic DNA or cDNA,
but it is also a useful technique for library screening
(Takumi 1997). As a screening method, the PCR has
the same versatility as hybridization, and the same
limitations. It is possible to identify any clone by the
PCR but only if there is sufficient information about
its sequence to make suitable primers.1
To isolate a specific clone, the PCR is carried
out with gene-specific primers that flank a unique
sequence in the target. A typical strategy for library
screening by the PCR is demonstrated by Takumi &
Lodish (1994). Instead of plating the library out on
agar as would be necessary for screening by hybridization, pools of clones are maintained in multiwell
plates. Each well is screened by the PCR and positive
wells are identified. The clones in each positive well
are then diluted into a series in a secondary set of
plates and screened again. The process is repeated
1
Note that in certain situations, clever experimental design
can allow the PCR to be used to isolate specific but unknown
DNA sequences. One example of this is 5′ RACE, which is discussed on p. 111. Another is inverse PCR (p. 397) which can
be used to isolate unknown flanking DNA surrounding the
insertion site of an integrating vector. In each case, primers
are designed to bind to known sequences that are joined to the
DNA fragment of interest, e.g. synthetic homopolymer tails,
linkers, or parts of the cloning vector.

116

CHAPTER 6

until wells carrying homogeneous clones corresponding to the gene of interest have been identified.
There are also several applications where the
use of degenerate primers is favorable. A degenerate
primer is a mixture of primers, all of similar sequence
but with variations at one or more positions. This is
analogous to the use of degenerate oligonucleotides
as hybridization probes, and the primers are synthesized in the same way. A common circumstance
requiring the use of degenerate primers is when the
primer sequences have to be deduced from amino
acid sequences (Lee et al. 1988). Degenerate primers
may also be employed to search for novel members
of a known family of genes (Wilks 1989), or to search
for homologous genes between species (Nunberg et al.
1989). As with oligonucleotide probes, the selection of amino acids with low codon degeneracy is
desirable. However, a 128-fold degeneracy in each
primer can be successful in amplifying a single copy
target from the human genome (Girgis et al. 1988).
Under such circumstances the concentration of
any individual primer sequence is very low, so mismatching between primer and template must occur
under the annealing conditions chosen. Since mismatching of the 3′-terminal nucleotide of the primer
may prevent efficient extension, degeneracy at this
position is to be avoided.
More diverse strategies are available for the
screening of expression libraries
If a DNA library is established using expression
vectors, each individual clone can be expressed to
yield a polypeptide. While all libraries can be screened
by hybridization or the PCR as discussed above,
expression libraries are useful because they allow a
range of alternative techniques to be employed, each
of which exploits some structural or functional property of the gene product. This can be important in
cases where the DNA sequence of the target clone is
completely unknown and there is no strategy available to design a suitable probe or set of primers.
For higher eukaryotes, all expression libraries are
cDNA libraries, since these lack introns and the clones
are in most cases of a reasonable size. Generally, a
random primer method is used for cDNA synthesis,
so there is a greater representation of 5′ sequences.
As discussed above, such libraries are representative
of their source, so certain cDNAs are abundant and
others rare. However, it should be noted that bacterial expression libraries and many yeast expression
libraries are usually genomic, since there are few

introns in bacteria and some yeast, and very little
intergenic DNA. Efficient expression libraries can
be generated by cloning randomly sheared genomic
DNA or partially digested DNA, and therefore all genes
are potentially represented at the same frequency
(Young et al. 1985). A problem with such libraries
is that clones corresponding to a specific gene may
carry termination sequences from the gene lying
immediately upstream, which can prevent efficient
expression. For this reason, conditions are imposed
so that the size of the fragments for cloning are smaller
than the target gene, and enough recombinants are
generated so that there is a reasonable chance that
each gene fragment will be cloned in all six possible
reading frames (three in each orientation).
Immunological screening uses specific
antibodies to detect expressed gene products
Immunological screening involves the use of antibodies that specifically recognize antigenic determinants on the polypeptide synthesized by a target
clone. This is one of the most versatile expressioncloning strategies because it can be applied to any
protein for which an antibody is available. Unlike the
screening strategies discussed below, there is also no
need for that protein to be functional. The molecular
target for recognition is generally an epitope, a short
sequence of amino acids that folds into a particular
three-dimensional conformation on the surface of
the protein. Epitopes can fold independently of the
rest of the protein and therefore often form even
when the polypeptide chain is incomplete, or when
expressed as a fusion with another protein. Importantly, many epitopes can form under denaturing
conditions when the overall conformation of the
protein is abnormal.
The first immunological screening techniques
were developed in the late 1970s, when expression
libraries were generally constructed using plasmid
vectors. The method of Broome & Gilbert (1978) was
widely used at the time. This method exploited the
facts that antibodies adsorb very strongly to certain
types of plastic, such as polyvinyl, and that IgG
antibodies can be readily labeled with 125I by iodination in vitro. As usual, transformed cells were plated
out on Petri dishes and allowed to form colonies. In
order to release the antigen from positive clones, the
colonies were lysed, e.g. using chloroform vapor or
by spraying with an aerosol of virulent phage (a
replica plate is required because this procedure kills
the bacteria). A sheet of polyvinyl that had been

Gene-cloning strategies

Polyvinyl sheet

IgG molecule

Antigen

125

l-labeled lgG molecule

Fig. 6.14 Antigen–antibody complex formation in the
immunochemical detection method of Broome and Gilbert.
(See text for details.)

coated with the appropriate antibody was then
applied to the surface of the plate, allowing antigen–
antibody complexes to form. The sheet was then
removed and exposed to 125I-labeled IgG specific to a
different determinant on the surface of the antigen
(i.e. a determinant not involved in the initial binding
of the antigen to the antibody-coated sheet; Fig. 6.14).
The sheet was then washed and exposed to X-ray
film. The clones identified by this procedure could
then be isolated from the replica plate. Note that this
“sandwich” technique is applicable only where two
antibodies recognizing different determinants of the
same protein are available. However, if the protein
is expressed as a fusion, antibodies that bind to
each component of the fusion can be used, efficiently
selecting for recombinant molecules.
While plasmid libraries have been useful for
expression screening (Helfman et al. 1983, Helfman
& Hughes 1987) it is much more convenient to
use bacteriophage λ insertion vectors because these
have a higher capacity and the efficiency of in vitro
packaging allows large numbers of recombinants to
be prepared and screened. Immunological screening
with phage λ cDNA libraries was introduced by
Young & Davies (1983) using the expression vector λgt11 which generates fusion proteins with
β-galactosidase under the control of the lac promoter
(see Box 6.1 for a discussion of λgt11 and similar
fusion vectors such as λZAP). In the original technique, screening was carried out using colonies of
induced lysogenic bacteria, which required the pro-

117

duction of replica plates as above. A simplification of
the method is possible by directly screening plaques
of recombinant phage. In this procedure (Fig. 6.15)
the library is plated out at moderately high density
(up to 5 × 104 plaques per 9 cm2 plate), with E. coli
strain Y1090 as the host. This E. coli strain overproduces the lac repressor and ensures that no expression of cloned sequences (which may be deleterious
to the host) takes place until the inducer IPTG is
presented to the infected cells. Y1090 is also deficient
in the lon protease, hence increasing the stability
of recombinant fusion proteins. Fusion proteins
expressed in plaques are absorbed onto a nitrocellulose membrane overlay and this membrane is processed for antibody screening. When a positive signal
is identified on the membrane, the positive plaque
can be picked from the original agar plate (a replica is
not necessary) and the recombinant phage can be
isolated.
The original detection method using iodinated
antibodies has been superseded by more convenient
methods using non-isotopic labels, which are also
more sensitive and have a lower background of nonspecific signal. Generally, these involve the use of
unlabeled primary antibodies directed against the
polypeptide of interest, which are in turn recognized
by secondary antibodies carrying an enzymatic label.
As well as eliminating the need for isotopes, such
methods also incorporate an amplification step, since
two or more secondary antibodies bind to the primary
antibody. Typically, the secondary antibody recognizes the species-specific constant region of the primary
antibody, and is conjugated to either horseradish
peroxidase (de Wet et al. 1984) or alkaline phosphatase (Mierendorf et al. 1987), each of which can
in turn be detected using a simple colorimetric assay
carried out directly on the nitrocellulose filter. Polyclonal antibodies, which recognize many different
epitopes, provide a very sensitive probe for immunological screening, although they may also crossreact to proteins in the expression host. Monoclonal
antibodies and cloned antibody fragments can also
be used, although the sensitivity of such reagents is
reduced because only a single epitope is recognized.
Southwestern and northwestern screening
are used to detect clones encoding nucleic
acid binding proteins
We have seen how fusion proteins expressed in plaques produced by recombinant λgt11 or λZAP vectors
may be detected by immunochemical screening.

118

CHAPTER 6

lacZ

cl857

Sam

cl857

Sam

λgt11

Insert cDNA at EcoRI site of λgt11 or
in polylinker region of λZAP

EcoRI
lacZ

λZAP

Polylinker
Plate out library on E. coli Y1090
Incubate for 4–6 h at 37°C to obtain
small plaques

Nitrocellulose sheet

Overlay plaques with nitrocellulose
sheet previously soaked in IPTG;
this induces expression from lac
promoter
Incubate for 4 hours

Carefully remove nitrocellulose sheet,
which will have adsorbed fusion
proteins expressed in recombinant
phage plaques, i.e. plaque-lift
Retain plate
Pick positive plaque from retained
plaque
Screen nitrocellulose plaque-lift
with specific antibody to detect
fusion protein
Identify positive plaque

A closely related approach has been used for the
screening and isolation of clones expressing sequencespecific DNA-binding proteins. As above, a plaque lift
is carried out to transfer a print of the library onto
nitrocellulose membranes. However, the screening
is carried out not using an antibody, by incubating
the membranes with a radiolabeled double-stranded
DNA oligonucleotide probe, containing the recognition sequence for the target DNA-binding protein.
This technique is called southwestern screening
because it combines the principles of Southern and
western blots. It has been particularly successful in
the isolation of clones expressing cDNA sequences
corresponding to certain mammalian transcription
factors (Vinson et al. 1988, Staudt et al. 1988, Singh
et al. 1988, Katagiri et al. 1989, Xiao et al. 1991,
Williams et al. 1991). A limitation of this technique
is that, since individual plaques contain only single
cDNA clones, transcription factors that function
only in the form of heterodimers or as part of a multi-

Fig. 6.15 Immunochemical
screening of λgt11 or λZAP
recombinant plaques.

meric complex do not recognize the DNA probe, and
the corresponding cDNAs cannot be isolated. Clearly
the procedure can also be successful only in cases
where the transcription factor remains functional
when expressed as a fusion polypeptide. It is also
clear that the affinity of the polypeptide for the
specific DNA sequence must be high, and this has led
to the preferential isolation of certain types of transcription factor (reviewed by Singh 1993). More
recently, a similar technique has been used to isolate
sequence-specific RNA-binding proteins, in this case
using a single-stranded RNA probe. By analogy
to the above, this is termed northwestern screening
and has been successful in a number of cases (e.g.
see Qian & Wilusz 1993; reviewed by Bagga &
Wilusz 1999). Both southwestern and northwestern
screening are most efficient when the oligonucleotide
contains the binding sequence in multimeric form.
This may mean that several fusion polypeptides on
the filter bind to each probe, hence greatly increasing

Gene-cloning strategies

the average dissociation time. To minimize non-specific
binding, a large excess of unlabeled double-stranded
DNA (or single-stranded RNA) is mixed with the
specific probe. However, it is usually necessary to
confirm the specificity of binding in a second round
of screening using the specific oligonucleotide probe
and one or more alternative probes containing similar sequences that are not expected to be recognized.
As well as DNA and RNA, a whole range of alternative “ligands” can be used to identify polypeptides
that specifically bind certain molecules. Such techniques are not widely used because they generally
have a low sensitivity and their success depends
on the preservation of the appropriate interacting
domain of the protein when exposed on the surface
of a nitrocellulose filter. Furthermore, as discussed
in Chapter 23, the yeast two-hybrid system and its
derivatives now provide versatile assay formats for
many specific types of protein–protein interaction,
with the advantage that such interactions are tested
in living cells so the proteins involved are more likely
to retain their functional interacting domains.
Functional cloning exploits the biochemical or
physiological activity of the gene product
Finally, we consider screening methods that depend
on the full biological activity of the protein. This is
often termed functional cloning or functional complementation. In this strategy, a particular DNA sequence
compensates for a missing function in a mutant cell,
and thus restores the wild-type phenotype. This can
be a very powerful method of expression cloning,
because if the mutant cells are non-viable under particular growth conditions, cells carrying the clone
of interest can be positively selected, allowing the
corresponding clones to be isolated.
Ratzkin & Carbon (1977) provide an early example of how certain eukaryotic genes can be cloned on
the basis of their ability to complement auxotrophic
mutations in E. coli. These investigators inserted
fragments of yeast DNA, obtained by mechanical
shearing, into the plasmid ColEl using a homopolymer tailing procedure. They transformed E. coli hisB
mutants, which are unable to synthesize histidine,
with the recombinant plasmids and plated the bacteria on minimal medium. In this way, they selected
for complementation of the mutation, and isolated
clones carrying an expressed yeast his gene. If
the function of the gene is highly conserved, it is
quite possible to carry out functional cloning of, for
example, mammalian proteins in bacteria and yeast.

119

Thus, complementation in yeast has been used to
isolate cDNAs for a number of mammalian metabolic
enzymes (e.g. Botstein & Fink 1988) and certain
highly conserved transcription factors (e.g. Becker
et al. 1991) as well as regulators of meiosis in plants
(Hirayama et al. 1997). This approach can also
be used in mammalian cells, as demonstrated by
Strathdee et al. (1992), who succeeded in isolating
the FACC gene, corresponding to complementation
group C of Fanconi’s anemia. Generally a pool system is employed, where cells are transfected with a
complex mix of up to 100,000 clones. Pools which
successfully complement the mutant phenotype are
then subdivided for a further round of transfection,
and the procedure repeated until the individual cDNA
responsible is isolated.
Functional complementation is also possible in
transgenic animals and plants. In this way, Probst
et al. (1998) were able to clone the mouse deafnessassociated gene Shaker-2, and from there its human
homolog, DFNB3 (Fig. 6.16). The Shaker-2 mutation had previously been mapped to a region of
the mouse genome that is syntenic (has a similar
order) to the region involved in a human deafness
disorder. BAC clones corresponding to this region
were therefore prepared from wild-type mice and
microinjected into the eggs of Shaker-2 mutants. The
resulting transgenic mice were screened for restoration of a normal hearing phenotype, allowing a BAC
clone corresponding to the functional Shaker-2 gene
to be identified. The gene was shown to encode a
cytoskeletal myosin protein. This was then used to
screen a human genomic library, resulting in the
identification of the equivalent human gene. Note
that no sequence information was required for this
screening procedure, and without the functional
assay there would have been no way to identify
either the mouse or human gene except through a
laborious chromosome walk from a linked marker.
The development of high-capacity transformation
vectors for plants (p. 289) has allowed similar
methods to be used to identify plant genes (e.g. Sawa
et al. 1999, Kubo & Kakimoto 2001).
Complementation analysis can be used only if an
appropriate mutant expression host is available. In
many cases, however, the function of the target gene
is too specialized for such a technique to work in
a bacterial or yeast expression host, and even in a
higher eukaryotic system, loss of function in the host
may be fully or partially compensated by one or more
other genes. As an alternative, it may be possible to
identify clones on the basis that they confer a gain of

120

CHAPTER 6

Wild-type mouse

Shaker-2 mouse

Genomic DNA

BAC
genomic
library

Homozygous
Shaker-2 eggs
BAC clones
spanning Shaker-2
candidate region

Inject individual BAC clones

Sequence
Screen human library
Map of human gene

function on the host cell. In some cases, this gain of
function is a selectable phenotype that allows cells
containing the corresponding clone to be positively
selected. For example, in an early example of the
expression of a mammalian gene in E. coli, Chang
et al. (1978) constructed a population of recombinant
plasmids containing cDNA derived from unfractionated mouse mRNA. This population of mRNA
molecules was expected to contain the transcript for
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). Mouse DHFR is much
less sensitive to inhibition by the drug trimethoprim
than E. coli DHFR, so growing transformants in medium containing the drug allowed selection for those
cells containing the mouse Dhfr cDNA.
In other cases, the phenotype conferred by the
clone of interest is not selectable, but can be detected
because it causes a visible change in phenotype. In
mammalian cells, for example, clones corresponding
to cellular oncogenes have been identified on the

Identify clone
that corrected defect

Fig. 6.16 Functional
complementation in
transgenic mice to
isolate the Shaker-2
gene. Homozygous
Shaker-2 fertilized
mouse eggs were
injected with BAC
clones derived from
the Shaker-2 candidate
region of a wild-type
mouse. Progeny were
screened for restoration
of the wild-type
phenotype, thus
identifying the BAC
clone corresponding to
the Shaker-2 gene. This
clone is then sequenced
and used to isolate and
map the corresponding
human disease gene
DFNB3.

basis of their ability to stimulate the proliferation
of quiescent mouse 3T3 fibroblast cells either in
culture or when transplanted into “nude mice” (e.g.
Brady et al. 1985). Many different specific assays
have also been developed for the functional cloning
of cDNAs encoding particular types of gene product. For example, Xenopus melanophores have been
used for the functional cloning of G-protein-coupled
receptors. Melanophores are dark cells containing
many pigment organelles called melanosomes. A
useful characteristic of these organelles is that they
disperse when adenyl cyclase or phospholipase C
is active, and aggregate when these enzymes are
inhibited. Therefore, the expression of cDNAs encoding G-protein-coupled receptors and many types
of receptor tyrosine kinases leads to redistribution
of pigmentation within the cell, which can be used
as an assay for the identification of receptor cDNAs
(reviewed by Lerner 1994).

Gene-cloning strategies

Positional cloning is used when there is no
biological information about a gene, but its
position can be mapped relative to other
genes or markers
Where there is no available biological information
about a gene product (often the case for human
disease genes) an approach known as positional
cloning can be used, which requires as input only the
mapped position of the gene (Parimoo et al. 1995).
Armed with this information, researchers can locate
the nearest physical markers and then institute what
is known as a chromosome walk. In this technique,
overlapping clones are obtained spanning the region
of interest by using each successive clone as a probe
to detect the next. Thus, one can “walk” from one
flanking marker to the next, knowing that at least
one of the clones will contain the gene of interest.
Chromosome walking is simple in principle, but
technically demanding. For large distances, it is
advisable to use libraries based on high-capacity
vectors, such as BACs and YACs, to reduce the number of steps involved. Before such libraries were

121

available, some ingenious strategies were used to
reduce the number of steps needed in a walk. In one
of the first applications of this technology, Hogness
and his coworkers (Bender el al. 1983) cloned DNA
from the Ace and rosy loci and the homeotic Bithorax
gene complex in Drosophila. The number of steps was
minimized by exploiting the numerous strains carrying well-characterized inversions and translocations
of specific chromosome regions. An example of chromosome walking in humans is discussed in Box 6.3.
We return to the topic in Chapter 25, which discusses some of the applications of genomics.

Difference cloning exploits differences in
the abundance of particular DNA fragments
Difference cloning refers to a range of techniques
used to isolate sequences that are represented in one
source of DNA but not another. Normally this means
differentially expressed cDNAs, representing genes
that are active in one tissue but inactive in another,
but the technique can also be applied to genomic

Box 6.3 A landmark publication. Identification of the cystic fibrosis gene
by chromosome walking and jumping
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a relatively common
severe autosomal recessive disorder. Until the
CF gene was cloned, there was little definite
information about the primary genetic
defect. The cloning of the CF gene was a
breakthrough for studying the biochemistry
of the disorder (abnormal chloride channel
function), for providing probes for pre-natal
diagnosis, and for potential treatment by
somatic gene therapy or other means. The
publication discussed here (Rommens et al.
1989) is especially notable for the generality
of the cloning strategy. In the absence of any
direct functional information about the CF
gene, the chromosomal location of the gene
was used as the basis of the cloning strategy.
Starting from markers identified by linkage
analysis as being close to the CF locus on
chromosome 7, a total of about 500 kb
was encompassed by a combination of
chromosome walking and jumping (a
variation of walking using larger vectors to

bridge unclonable gaps; Collins et al. 1987). In
this work, large numbers of clones were
involved, obtained from several different
phage and cosmid genomic libraries. Among
these libraries, one was prepared using the
Maniatis strategy using the lCharon 4A
vector, and several prepared using the lDASH
and lFIX vectors after partial digestion of
human genomic DNA with Sau3AI. Cloned
regions were aligned with a map of the
genome in the CF region, obtained by longrange restriction mapping using rare-cutting
enzymes such as NotI in combination with
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. The actual CF
gene was detected in this cloned region by a
number of criteria, such as the identification of
open reading frames, the detection of cDNAs
hybridizing to the genomic clones, the
detection of cross-hybridizing sequences in
other species, and the presence of CpG
islands, which are known to be associated with
the 5′ ends of many genes in mammals.

122

CHAPTER 6

DNA to identify genes corresponding to deletion
mutants. There are a number of cell- based differential cloning methods and also a range of PCR techniques. Each method follows one of two principles:
either the differences between two sources are displayed, allowing differentially expressed clones to be
visually identified, or the differences are exploited to
generate a collection of clones that are enriched for
differentially expressed sequences. The analysis of
differential gene expression has taken on new importance recently with the advent of high-throughput
techniques allowing the monitoring of many, and in
some cases all, genes simultaneously.
Library-based approaches may involve
differential screening or the creation of
subtracted libraries enriched for differentially
represented clones
An early approach to difference cloning was differential
screening, a simple variation on normal hybridizationbased library screening protocols that is useful for
the identification of differentially expressed cDNAs
that are also moderately abundant (e.g. Dworkin &
Dawid 1980). Let us consider, for example, the isolation of cDNAs derived from mRNAs which are abundant in the gastrula embryo of the frog Xenopus but
which are absent, or present at low abundance, in
the egg. A cDNA library is prepared from gastrula
mRNA. Replica filters carrying identical sets of
recombinant clones are then prepared. One of these
filters is then probed with 32P-labeled mRNA (or
cDNA) from gastrula embryos and one with 32Plabeled mRNA (or cDNA) from the egg. Some
colonies will give a positive signal with both probes;
these represent cDNAs derived from mRNA types
that are abundant at both stages of development.
Some colonies will not give a positive signal with
either probe; these correspond to mRNA types present at undetectably low abundance in both tissues.
This is a feature of using complex probes, which are
derived from mRNA populations rather than single
molecules: only abundant or moderately abundant
sequences in the probe carry a significant proportion
of the label and are effective in hybridization. Importantly, some colonies give a positive signal with the
gastrula probe, but not with the egg probe. These
can be visually identified and should correspond to
differentially expressed sequences.
A recent resurgence in the popularity of differential screening has come about through the development of DNA microarrays (Schena et al. 1995). In

this technique, cDNA clones are transferred to a
miniature solid support in a dense grid pattern, and
screened simultaneously with complex probes from
two sources, which are labeled with different fluorochromes. Clones that are expressed in both tissues
will fluoresce in a color that represents a mixture of
fluorochromes, while differentially expressed clones
will fluoresce in a color closer to the pure signal of
one or other of the probes. A similar technique involves
the use of DNA chips containing densely arrayed oligonucleotides. The development and application of DNA
microarray technology are discussed in Chapter 20.
An alternative to differential screening is to
generate a library that is enriched in differentially
expressed clones by removing sequences that are
common to two sources. This is called a subtracted
cDNA library and should greatly assist the isolation
of rare cDNAs. If we use the same example as above,
the aim of the experiment would be to generate a
library enriched for cDNAs derived from gastrulaspecific mRNAs. This would be achieved by hybridizing first-strand cDNAs prepared from gastrula
mRNA with a large excess of mRNA from Xenopus
oocytes. If this driver population is labeled in some
way allowing it to be removed from the mixed population, only gastrula-specific cDNAs would remain
behind. A suitable labeling method would be to add
biotin to all the oocyte mRNA, allowing oocyte/
gastrula RNA/cDNA hybrids as well as excess oocyte
mRNA to be subtracted by binding to streptavidin,
for which biotin has great affinity (Duguid et al.
1988, Rubinstein et al. 1990). Libraries can be prepared by several rounds of extraction with driver
mRNA, resulting in highly enriched subtracted
libraries (reviewed by Sagerstrom et al. 1997). There
are also a few examples where subtractive cloning
has been used with genomic libraries to identify differentially represented sequences. Perhaps the most
remarkable example of this approach is the cloning
of the human gene for muscular dystrophy by subtractive cloning using normal DNA and DNA from
an individual with a deletion spanning the DMD
gene. This is discussed in Box 6.4.
Differentially expressed genes can also be
identified using PCR-based methods
As expected, PCR-based methods for difference
cloning are more sensitive and rapid than librarybased methods, and can be applied to small amounts
of starting material. Two similar methods have been
described which use pairs of short arbitrary primers

Gene-cloning strategies

123

Box 6.4 A landmark publication. Subtraction cloning of the human
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) gene
While most subtractive-cloning experiments
involve cDNAs, this publication reports one of
the few successful attempts to isolate a gene
using a subtracted genomic library. The study
began with the identification of a young boy,
known as “BB”, who suffered from four Xlinked disorders, including DMD. Cytogenetic
analysis showed that the boy had a
chromosome deletion in the region Xp21,
which was known to be the DMD locus.
A subtraction-cloning procedure was then
devised to isolate the DNA sequences that
were deleted in BB (Kunkel 1986). Genomic
DNA was isolated from BB and randomly
sheared, generating fragments with blunt
ends and non-specific overhangs. DNA was
also isolated from an aneuploid cell line with
four (normal) X chromosomes. This DNA was
digested with the restriction enzyme MboI,
generating sticky ends suitable for cloning.
The MboI fragments were mixed with a large
excess of the randomly sheared DNA from BB,
and the mixture was denatured and then
persuaded to reanneal extensively, using
phenol enhancement. The principle behind

to amplify pools of partial cDNA sequences. If the
same primer combinations are used to amplify
cDNAs from two different tissues, the products can
be fractionated side by side on a sequencing gel, and
differences in the pattern of bands generated, the
mRNA fingerprint, therefore reveal differentially
expressed genes (Fig. 6.17). Essentially the distinction between the two techniques concerns the
primer used for first-strand cDNA synthesis. In the
differential display PCR technique (Liang & Pardee
1992) the antisense primer is an oligo-dT primer
with a specific two-base extension, which thus binds
at the 3′ end of the mRNA. Conversely, in the arbitrarily primed PCR method (Welsh et al. 1992), the
antisense primer is arbitrary and can in principle
anneal anywhere in the message. In each case, an
arbitrary sense primer is used, allowing the amplification of partial cDNAs from pools of several hundred mRNA molecules. Following electrophoresis,
differentially expressed cDNAs can be excised from

the strategy was that, since the randomly
fragmented DNA was present in a vast excess,
most of the DNA from the cell line would
be sequestered into hybrid DNA molecules
that would be unclonable. However,
those sequences present among the MboI
fragments but absent from BB’s DNA due to
the deletion would only be able to reanneal
to complementary strands from the cell line.
Such strands would have intact MboI sticky
ends and could therefore be ligated into
an appropriate cloning vector. Using this
strategy, Kunkel and colleagues generated
a genomic library that was highly enriched
for fragments corresponding to the deletion
in BB. Subclones from the library were tested
by hybridization against normal DNA and
DNA from BB to confirm that they mapped to
the deletion. To confirm that the genuine
DMD gene had been isolated, the positive
subclones were then tested against DNA from
many other patients with DMD, revealing
similar deletions in 6.5% of cases.
From Kunkel (1986) Nature 322: 73–77.

the gel and characterized further, usually to confirm
their differential expression.
Despite the fact that these display techniques are
problematical and appear to generate a large number of false positive results, there have been remarkable successes. In the original report by Liang &
Pardee, the technique was used to study differences
between tumor cells and normal cells, resulting in
the identification of a number of genes associated
with the onset of cancer (Liang et al. 1992). Further
cancer-related gene products have been discovered
by other groups using differential display (Sager et al.
1993, Okamato & Beach 1994). The technique has
also been used successfully to identify developmentally
regulated genes (e.g. Adati et al. 1995) and genes
that are induced by hormone treatment (Nitsche
et al. 1996). An advantage of display techniques over
subtracted libraries is that changes can be detected
in related mRNAs representing the same gene family.
In subtractive-cloning procedures, such differences

124

CHAPTER 6

(a)
A G T T T T T T T T GG T T T T T T T T CG T T T T T T T T T G T T T T T T T T
A A T T T T T T T T GA T T T T T T T T CA T T T T T T T T T A T T T T T T T T

=

NV T T T T T T T T

A C T T T T T T T T GC T T T T T T T T C C T T T T T T T T T C T T T T T T T T
(b)
AAAAAAAA

AAAAAAAA

AAAAAAAA
NV T T T T T T T T

AAAAAAAA
NV T T T T T T T T

NV T T T T T T T T
N9

NV T T T T T T T T
N9

NV T T T T T T T T
AAAAAAAA

NV T T T T T T T T
AAAAAAAA

(c)

Fig. 6.17 Summary of the differential mRNA display technique, after Liang & Pardee (1992). (a) A set of 12 oligo(dT) primers
is synthesized, each with a different two-base extension; the generic designation for this primer set is NVTTTTTTTTT, where N is
any nucleotide and V is any nucleotide except T. (b) Messenger RNA from two sources is then converted into cDNA using these
primers, generating 12 non-overlapping pools of first-strand cDNA molecules for each source. The PCR is then carried out using
the appropriate oligo(dT) primer and a set of arbitrary 9-mers (N9), which may anneal anywhere within the cDNA sequence. This
facilitates the amplification of pools of cDNA fragments, essentially the same as expressed sequence tages (ESTs). (c) Pools of PCR
products, derived from alternative mRNA sources but amplified with the same pair of primers, are then compared side by side on
a sequencing gel. Bands present in one lane but absent from the other are likely to represent differentially expressed genes. The
corresponding bands can be excised from the sequencing gel and the PCR products subcloned, allowing sequence annotation and
expression analysis, e.g. by northern blot or in situ hybridization, to confirm differential expression.

are often overlooked because the excess of driver
DNA can eliminate such sequences (see review by
McClelland et al. 1995).
Representational difference analysis is a PCRbased subtractive-cloning procedure
Representational difference analysis is a PCR subtraction technique, i.e. common sequences between
two sources are eliminated prior to amplification.
The method was developed for the comparative
analysis of genomes (Lisitsyn et al. 1993) but has
been modified for cloning differentially expressed
genes (Hubank & Schatz 1994). Essentially the technique involves the same principle as subtraction

hybridization in that a large excess of a DNA from
one source, the driver, is used to make common
sequences in the other source, the tester, unclonable (in this case unamplifiable). The general scheme
is shown in Fig. 6.18. cDNA is prepared from
two sources, digested with restriction enzymes and
amplified. The amplified products from one source
are then annealed to specific linkers that provide
annealing sites for a unique pair of PCR primers.
These linkers are not added to the driver cDNA. A
large excess of driver cDNA is then added to the tester
cDNA and the populations are mixed. Driver/driver
fragments possess no linkers and cannot be amplified, while driver/tester fragments possess only one
primer annealing site and will only be amplified in a

125

Gene-cloning strategies

mRNA

cDNA

Restriction digest
(4 cutter)
Ligate 12/24 linker
Melt 12-mer; fill in

PCR

Representations
Tester

Driver

Digest;
ligate new 12/24 linker

Tester:Driver

Digest

Mix 1 : 100; Melt; Hybridize
Tester:Tester

Driver:Driver

Exponential amplification
Retained

No amplification
Eliminated

Melt 12-mer;
Fill in; PCR

Fig. 6.18 Basic
strategy for cDNAbased representational
difference analysis.
See text for details.

Linear amplification
Digest with
Mung Bean Nuclease
PCR

linear fashion. However, cDNAs that are present
only in the tester will possess linkers on both strands
and will be amplified exponentially, and can therefore be isolated and cloned.

Suggested reading
Bashiardes S. & Lovett M. (2000) cDNA detection and
analysis. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 5, 15–20.
Glover D.M. & Hames B.D. (eds.) (1995) DNA Cloning 1:
A Practical Approach. Core Techniques, 2nd edn. IRL
Press, Oxford.

First difference product

Glover D.M. & Hames B.D. (eds.) (1995) DNA Cloning 3:
A Practical Approach. Complex Systems, 2nd edn. IRL
Press, Oxford.
Hawkins T.K., Detter J.C. & Richardson P.M. (2002)
Whole genome amplification – applications and
advances. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 13, 65–7.
McPherson M.J. & Muller S.G. (2000) PCR: The Basics.
BIOS Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
Sambrook J. & Russel D. (2001) Molecular Cloning: A
Laboratory Manual, 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York.
Soares M.B. (1997) Identification and cloning of differentially expressed genes. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 8, 542–6.

CHAPTER 7
Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

The commonest method of DNA sequencing
is Sanger sequencing (also known as
chain-terminator or dideoxy sequencing)
The first significant DNA sequence to be obtained
was that of the cohesive ends of phage λ DNA
(Wu & Taylor 1971) which are only 12 bases long.
The methodology used was derived from RNA
sequencing and was not applicable to large-scale
DNA sequencing. An improved method, plus and
minus sequencing, was developed and used to sequence the 5386 bp phage ΦX174 genome (Sanger
et al. 1977a). This method was superseded in 1977
by two different methods, that of Maxam and Gilbert
(1977) and the chain-termination or dideoxy method
(Sanger et al. 1977b). For a while the Maxam and
Gilbert method, which makes use of chemical reagents to bring about base-specific cleavage of DNA,
was the favored procedure. However, refinements to
the chain-termination method meant that by the
early 1980s it became the preferred procedure. To
date, most large sequences have been determined
using this technology, with the notable exception of
bacteriophage T7 (Dunn & Studier 1983). For this
reason, only the chain-termination method will be
described here.
The chain-terminator or dideoxy procedure for DNA
sequencing capitalizes on two properties of DNA
polymerases: (i) their ability to synthesize faithfully a
complementary copy of a single-stranded DNA template; and (ii) their ability to use 2′, 3′-dideoxynucleotides as substrates (Fig. 7.1). Once the analog is
incorporated at the growing point of the DNA chain,
the 3′ end lacks a hydroxyl group and no longer is a
substrate for chain elongation. Thus, the growing
DNA chain is terminated, i.e. dideoxynucleotides act
as chain terminators. In practice, the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase is used because this lacks
the 5′ → 3′ exonuclease activity associated with the
intact enzyme. Initiation of DNA synthesis requires a
primer and usually this is a chemically synthesized

oligonucleotide which is annealed close to the
sequence being analyzed.
DNA synthesis is carried out in the presence of
the four deoxynucleoside triphosphates, one or more
of which is labeled with 32P, and in four separate
incubation mixes containing a low concentration
of one each of the four dideoxynucleoside triphosphate analogs. Therefore, in each reaction there is a
population of partially synthesized radioactive DNA
molecules, each having a common 5′ end, but each
varying in length to a base-specific 3′ end (Fig. 7.2).
After a suitable incubation period, the DNA in
each mixture is denatured and electrophoresed in a
sequencing gel.

HO

γ

β

α

O

O

O

P

O

O–

P

O

O–

P

Base
(A, G, C or T)
O

O–

5’
CH2
4’

O
H

1’

H

H

H
3’
OH

2’
H

Normal deoxynucleoside triphosphate (i.e. 2’ deoxynucleotide)

HO

γ

β

α

O

O

O

P
O–

O

P
O–

O

P
O–

Base
(A, G, C or T)
O

5’
CH2
4’

O
H

1’

H

H
OH group
missing

H
3’
H

2’
H

Dideoxynucleoside triphosphate (i.e. 2’,3’ dideoxynucleotide)

Fig. 7.1 Dideoxynucleoside triphosphates act as chain
terminators because they lack a 3′-OH group. Numbering of
the carbon atoms of the pentose is shown (primes distinguish
these from atoms in the bases). The α, β, and γ phosphorus
atoms are indicated.

127

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

5’

3’

CATACGTGG CCTTACG
Add 5’ CGTAAGG 3’ primer

5’

3’

CATACGTGGCCTTACG
GGAATGC 5’
Add d*ATP, d*CTP, d*GTP and d*TTP

Add
ddATP
+
Klenow
fragment

Add
ddCTP
+
Klenow
fragment

Add
ddGTP
+
Klenow
fragment

CGTAAGG*C*CdA
and
CGTAAGG*C*C*A*G*G*TdA

Add
ddTTP
+
Klenow
fragment

CGTAAGG*C*C*A*CdG
and
CGTAAGG*C*C*A*C*G*T*A*TdG

CGTAAGGdC
and
CGTAAGG*CdC
and
CGTAAGG*C*C*AdC

CGTAAGG*C*C*A*C*GdT
and
CGTAAGG*C*C*A*C*G*T*AdT

Electrophoresis and autoradiograph

Sequence

A

C

G

T

CGTAAGGCCACGTATdG
CGTAAGGCCACGTAdT
CGTAAGGCCACGTdA
CGTAAGGCCACGdT
CGTAAGGCCACdG

Direction of
electrophoresis

CGTAAGGCCAdC
CGTAAGGCCdA
CGTAAGGCdC
CGTAAGGdC

Fig. 7.2 DNA sequencing with dideoxynucleoside triphosphates as chain terminators. In this figure asterisks indicate the
presence of 32P and the prefix “d” indicates the presence of a dideoxynucleotide. At the top of the figure the DNA to be sequenced is
enclosed within the box. Note that unless the primer is also labeled with a radioisotope the smallest band with the sequence
CGTAAGGdC will not be detected by autoradiography as no labeled bases were incorporated.

A sequencing gel is a high-resolution gel designed
to fractionate single-stranded (denatured) DNA fragments on the basis of their size and which is capable
of resolving fragments differing in length by a single
base. They routinely contain 6–20% polyacrylamide
and 7 m urea. The function of the urea is to minimize
DNA secondary structure which affects electrophoretic mobility. The gel is run at sufficient power
to heat up to about 70°C. This also minimizes
DNA secondary structure. The labeled DNA bands

obtained after such electrophoresis are revealed by
autoradiography on large sheets of X-ray film and
from these the sequence can be read (Fig. 7.3).
To facilitate the isolation of single strands, the DNA
to be sequenced may be cloned into one of the clustered cloning sites in the lac region of the M13 mp
series of vectors (Fig. 7.4). A feature of these vectors
is that cloning into the same region can be mediated
by any one of a large selection of restriction enzymes
but still permits the use of a single sequencing primer.

128

CHAPTER 7

Sequencing gel autoradiograph
A

C

G

electrophoresis. These modifications are discussed in
more detail below.
The sharpness of the autoradiographic images can
be improved by replacing the 32P-radiolabel with the
much lower energy 33P or 35S. In the case of 35S, this
is achieved by including an α-35S-deoxynucleoside
triphosphate (Fig. 7.5) in the sequencing reaction.
This modified nucleotide is accepted by DNA polymerase and incorporated into the growing DNA
chain. Non-isotopic detection methods also have been
developed with chemiluminescent, chromogenic, or
fluorogenic reporter systems. Although the sensitivity of these methods is not as great as with radiolabels, it is adequate for many purposes.
The combination of chain-terminator sequencing
and M13 vectors to produce single-stranded DNA
is very powerful. Very good quality sequencing is
obtainable with this technique, especially when the
improvements given by 35S-labeled precursors and
T7 DNA polymerase are exploited. Further modifications allow sequencing of “double-stranded” DNA,
i.e. double-stranded input DNA is denatured by alkali,
neutralized, and one strand then is annealed with
a specific primer for the actual chain-terminator
sequencing reactions. This approach has gained in
popularity as the convenience of having a universal
primer has grown less important with the widespread availability of oligonucleotide synthesizers.
With this development, Sanger sequencing has been
liberated from its attachment to the M13 cloning
system; e.g. PCR-amplified DNA segments can be
sequenced directly. One variant of the doublestranded approach, often employed in automated
sequencing, is “cycle sequencing”. This involves a
linear amplification of the sequencing reaction using

T

Electrophoresis

T 3’
C
G
C
A
G
T
C
C
T
A
G
C
T
T
A
G
C
G
G 5’

Fig. 7.3 Enlarged autoradiograph of a sequencing gel
obtained with the chain-terminator DNA sequencing
method.

The original Sanger method has been greatly
improved by a number of experimental
modifications
Since its first description, the Sanger method of
sequencing has been greatly improved in terms of
read length, accuracy, and convenience by a whole
series of changes to the basic protocol. These changes
include the choice of label, enzymes (Box 7.1) and
template, the development of automated sequencing,
and a move from slab gel electrophoresis to capillary

EcoRI

BamI SalI

SalI
PstI

BamI

EcoRI

5’

3’

ATGACCATGATTACGAATTCCCCGGATCCGTCGACCTGCAGGTCGACGGATCCGGGGAATTCACTGGCCGTCGTTTTACAACGTCGTGACTGGG
TTGCAGCACTGACCC

3’
AccI HincII
1 2 3 4

Direction of
lac translation

AccI HincII

Synthesis
of DNA in
sequencing
reaction

5’
Primer
oligonucleotide

Start of
translation of
lac α fragment

Fig. 7.4 Sequence of M13 mp7 DNA in the vicinity of the multipurpose cloning region. The upper sequence is that of M13
mp7 from the ATG start codon of the β-galactosidase α-fragment, through the multipurpose cloning region, and back into the
β-galactosidase gene. The short sequence at the right-hand side is that of the primer used to initiate DNA synthesis across the
cloned insert. The numbered boxes correspond to the amino acids of the β-galactosidase fragment.

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

129

Box 7.1 DNA polymerases used for Sanger sequencing
Many DNA polymerases have 5′→3′ and
3′→5′ exonuclease activities in addition
to their polymerase activity. The 5′→3′
nuclease activity is detrimental to sequencing
regardless of whether the label for detection
is on the 5′ end of the sequencing fragment,
incorporated into the fragment as an internal
label, or is on the terminator. In some cases,
the domain of the polymerase that has the
5′→3′ exonuclease activity is absent, as in
the case of T7 DNA polymerase. In others, the
5′→3′ nuclease domain can be removed by
protease cleavage as first demonstrated by
Klenow & Henningsen (1970) with E. coli DNA
polymerase I. Alternatively, the domain can be
removed by deletion, although some enzymes
with deletions lose processivity. By contrast,
Taq DNA polymerases with such deletions
have greater thermostability and greater
fidelity than full-length enzymes.
The 3′→5′ exonuclease activity is
undesirable for sequencing applications
because it hydrolyzes the single-stranded
sequencing primers. In most DNA
polymerases this activity can be destroyed
by point mutations or small deletions but
some DNA polymerases, like those from
Thermus species, naturally lack the activity.
When Sanger sequencing was first
developed the enzyme used was the
Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I.
A disadvantage of this enzyme is a
sequence-dependent discrimination of
dideoxy nucleotides (ddNTPs) for ordinary

HO

γ

β

O

O

P
O–

O

P
O–

α
35

Base

S

O

P

O

CH2

O

O–
H

H

H

H
OH

H

Fig. 7.5 Structure of an α-35S-deoxynucleoside
triphosphate.

nucleotides (dNTPs). This leads to a variation
of the amount of fragments for each base in
the sequencing reaction and hence uneven
band intensities in autoradiographs or uneven
peak heights if fluorescent labels are used
(see p. 130). This leads to a requirement for
high concentrations of ddNTPs, which are
expensive, and increases the background
noise with fluorescent labels. Problems also
are encountered when using native Taq DNA
polymerase (from Thermus aquaticus).
The discrimination of ddNTPs can be greatly
reduced by replacing the Klenow polymerase
with T7 DNA polymerase. The reason for this
is that native E. coli DNA polymerase and Taq
DNA polymerase have a phenylalanine in
their active sites as compared with tyrosine
in T7 DNA polymerase. Exchanging the
phenylalanine residue with a tyrosine residue
in the E. coli and Taq enzymes decreases the
discrimination of ddNTPs by a factor of
250–8000 (Tabor & Richardson 1995).
Native Taq DNA polymerase exhibits
another undesirable characteristic: uneven
incorporation of ddNTPs with a strong bias
in favor of ddGTP incorporation. This bias
results from a strong interaction between
ddGTP and an arginine residue at position
660. When this arginine residue is replaced
with aspartate, serine, leucine, phenylalanine,
or tyrosine, the bias is eliminated. This
results in more even band intensities,
greater accuracy, and longer read lengths
(Li et al. 1999a).

25 cycles of denaturation, annealing of a specific
primer to one strand only, and extension in the presence of Taq DNA polymerase plus labeled dideoxynucleotides. Alternatively, labeled primers can be used
with unlabeled dideoxynucleotides.
There are some important differences between
M13 phages, plasmids, and PCR products as templates in sequencing reactions. The single-stranded
M13 phages can be sequenced only on one strand
and share a limitation in size with PCR products to a
practical maximum of 2–3 kb. Longer PCR products
can be obtained under certain conditions but have
not been used routinely for sequencing. Plasmids can

130

CHAPTER 7

harbor up to 10 kb fragments if low-copy-number
vectors are used and this is a major advantage for
linking sequences when very long stretches of
DNA need to be sequenced. They also give better
representation of DNA sequences from higher
organisms with less tendency to eliminate repeated
sequences (Chissoe et al. 1997, Elkin et al. 2001).
A disadvantage of PCR sequencing is “polymerase
slippage”, a term that refers to the inability of the
Taq DNA polymerase to incorporate the correct
number of bases when copying runs of 12 or more
identical bases.
It is possible to automate DNA sequencing
by replacing radioactive labels with
fluorescent labels
In manual sequencing, the DNA fragments are
radiolabeled in four chain-termination reactions,
separated on the sequencing gel in four lanes, and
detected by autoradiography. This approach is not
well suited to automation. To automate the process it
is desirable to acquire sequence data in real time by
detecting the DNA bands within the gel during the

electrophoretic separation. However, this is not trivial as there are only about 10−15–10−16 moles of DNA
per band. The solution to the detection problem is
to use fluorescence methods. In practice, the fluorescent tags are attached to the chain-terminating
nucleotides. Each of the four dideoxynucleotides
carries a spectrally different fluorophore. The tag is
incorporated into the DNA molecule by the DNA
polymerase and accomplishes two operations in one
step: it terminates synthesis and it attaches the
fluorophore to the end of the molecule. Alternatively, fluorescent primers can be used with nonlabeled dideoxynucleotides. By using four different
fluorescent dyes it is possible to electrophorese all
four chain-terminating reactions together in one lane
of a sequencing gel. The DNA bands are detected
by their fluorescence as they electrophorese past a
detector (Fig. 7.6). If the detector is made to scan horizontally across the base of a slab gel, many separate
sequences can be scanned, one sequence per lane.
Because the different fluorophores affect the mobility of fragments to different extents, sophisticated
software is incorporated into the scanning step to
ensure that bands are read in the correct order. This

V–

Upper
buffer
reservoir

Polyacrylamide
sequencing
gel
Electrophoresis
Fluorescently
labeled
DNA bands

V+
Lower
buffer
reservoir

Scan line

Fluorescence detector

Fluorescence

Sequence
A G C T T A C G G A C T A A T G C
Dye 1
Dye 2
Dye 3
Dye 4
Computer

Time

Fig. 7.6 Block diagram of an
automated DNA sequencer and
idealized representation of the
correspondence between
fluorescence in a single
electrophoresis lane and
nucleotide sequence.

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

is the principle on which the original Applied
Biosystems (ABI) instruments operate.
An alternative to the four-dye system is to start
with a single fluorescent-labeled primer which is
used in all four sequencing reactions. The resulting
fluorescent-labeled DNA strands are separated in
four different lanes in the electrophoresis system.
This is the basis of the Amersham Pharmacia
Biotech ALF sequencer. It has a fixed argon laser
which emits light that passes through the width of
the gel and is sensed by detectors in each of the lanes.
Another variation is provided by the LI-COR twodye near-infrared DNA analysis system. It can detect
the products of two different sequencing reactions
in parallel, enabling pooling reactions and simultaneous bidirectional sequencing. Sequencing both
directions on a template by combining forward and
reverse primers in the same direction produces twice
the data from each reaction prepared.
Automated DNA sequencers offer a number of
advantages that are not particularly obvious. First,
manual sequencing can generate excellent data
but even in the best sequencing laboratories poor
autoradiographs frequently are produced that make
sequence reading difficult or impossible. Usually the
problem is related to the need to run different termination reactions in different tracks of the gel. Skilled
DNA sequencers ignore bad sequencing tracks but
many laboratories do not. This leads to poor quality
sequence data. The use of a single-gel track for all
four dideoxy reactions means that this problem is
less acute in automated sequencing. Nevertheless, it
is desirable to sequence a piece of DNA several times,
and on both strands, to eliminate errors caused by
technical problems. It should be noted that long runs
of the same nucleotide or a high G + C content can
cause compression of the bands on a gel, necessitating manual reading of the data, even with an
automated system. Note also that multiple tandem
short-repeats, which are common in the DNA of
higher eukaryotes, can reduce the fidelity of DNA
copying, particularly with Taq DNA polymerase. The
second advantage of automated DNA sequencers
is that the output from them is in machine-readable
form. This eliminates the errors that arise when DNA
sequences are read and transcribed manually.
DNA sequencing throughput can be greatly
increased by replacing slab gels with capillary
array electrophoresis
There are two problems with high-volume sequencing in slab gels. First, the preparation of the gels is

131

very labor-intensive and is a significant cost in largescale sequencing centers. Secondly, DNA sequencing speed is related to the electric field applied to
separate the fragments. To a first approximation, the
sequencing speed increases linearly with the applied
electric field but application of a voltage across a
material with high conductivity results in the generation of heat (“Joule heating”). Because of their
thickness, slab gels cannot efficiently radiate heat,
and Joule heating limits the maximum electric field
that can be applied.
Capillary electrophoresis is undertaken in highpurity fused silica capillaries with an internal diameter of 50 µm. Because of their small diameter, these
capillaries are not prone to Joule heating even when
high electric fields are applied in order to obtain rapid
separation of DNA fragments. In addition, silica capillaries are very flexible, are easily incorporated into
automated instruments, and can be supplied prefilled with a gel matrix. This reduces the hands-on
operator time for 1000 samples per day from 8 h
with a slab gel system to 15 min with a capillary gel
system (Venter et al. 1998). For this reason, capillary
gels are very rapidly replacing slab gels in automated
sequencing instruments. The current generation
of capillary sequencers has arrays of up to 384
capillaries.
In practice, DNA sequencing by capillary electrophoresis is very simple (Dovichi & Zhang 2001).
Instead of placing the product of a sequencing reaction in the well of a slab gel it is applied to the top of a
capillary gel. A number of different materials can be
used for the gel matrix but it usually is linear (i.e.
non-crosslinked) polyacrylamide. The labeled DNA
fragments migrate through the capillary and emerge
at the end in a vertical stream where they are
detected (Fig. 7.7). Consideration of the detection
method shown in Fig. 7.7 reveals another advantage
of capillary gels over slab gels. With slab gels, the
DNA fragments do not always run in a straight line
and this makes automated reading more complicated but with capillaries this problem does not
occur.
The accuracy of automated DNA sequencing
can be determined with basecalling
algorithms
As DNA fragments pass the detector of a DNA
sequencer they generate a signal. Information about
the identity of the nucleotide bases is provided by the
base-specific dye attached to the primer or dideoxy
chain-terminating nucleotide. Additional steps

132

CHAPTER 7

Capillaries

Window

Sheath
inlet

Laser
Lens

To waste

Fig. 7.7 Capillary linear-array sheath-flow cuvet
instrument. Sheath fluid draws the analyte into thin
streams in the center of the flow chamber, with a single
stream produced downstream from each capillary. A laser
beam is focused beneath the capillary tips on the sample
streams. A lens collects the fluorescence emission signal,
which is then spectrally filtered and detected with either an
array of photodiodes or with a charged couple device (CCD)
camera. (Redrawn with permission from Dovichi & Zhang
2001.)

include lane tracking and profiling, if slab gels
have been used, and trace processing. The latter
involves the production of a set of four traces of
signal intensities corresponding to each of the four
bases over the length of the sequencing run. Using
algorithms the four traces then are converted into
the actual sequence of nucleotides. This process is
known as basecalling.
The accuracy of the basecalling algorithms directly impacts the quality of the resulting sequence.
In an ideal world the traces would be free of noise and
peaks would be evenly spaced, of equal height, and
have a Gaussian shape. In reality, the peaks have
variable spacing and height and there can be secondary peaks underneath the primary peaks. As a consequence, basecalling is error prone and for accurate
sequence assembly it is essential to provide an estimate of quality for each assigned base (Buetow et al.
1999, Altshuler et al. 2000b). The algorithm that
gives the best estimate of error rates for basecalling
with slab-gel based sequencing is PHRED (Ewing
& Green 1998, Ewing et al. 1998). A PHRED quality
score of X corresponds to an error probability of
approximately 10−X/10. Thus a PHRED score of 30
corresponds to a 99.9% accuracy for the basecall. An
improved basecalling algorithm, Life Trace, which
is particularly suitable for capillary sequencing, has
been described by Walther et al. (2001).
Different strategies are required depending
on the complexity of the DNA to be
sequenced
Basically, there are three applications of sequencing:

1 sequencing of short regions of DNA to identify
mutations of interest or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs);
2 sequencing of complete genes and associated
upstream and downstream control regions;
3 sequencing of complete genomes.
For each of these applications there are different strategies and different resource requirements. When the
objective is the identification of mutations in a particular stretch of DNA, e.g. following site-directed
mutagenesis of a cloned gene, the requirement is to
analyze the same short sequence (10–20 nucleotides)
from a large number of different samples. In essence,
one resequences the same stretch of DNA many times.
This is easily done with Sanger sequencing but the
method generates many more data (500 bases of
sequence) than are required. In such instances it
may be more convenient to use one of the alternative
sequencing methods described later in this chapter.
The strategy for sequencing a gene depends on its
size. In prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes genes are
seldom more than a few kilobases in size. Thus, all
that is required is to sequence a series of overlapping
gene fragments. By contrast, in higher eukaryotes
a gene may span several hundred kilobases or even
several megabases. Sequencing DNA of this size
requires a different approach because 10 Mb of data
are required to generate 1 Mb of confirmed sequence.
This is the equivalent of sequencing a small bacterial
genome and the strategy for this is discussed in
Chapter 17. An alternative approach is to sequence
only the cDNA since this might be only 2 kb in
length compared to 1 Mb for the intact gene. There
are two disadvantages with this approach. First,
control elements such as enhancers and promoters
as well as splice sites would not be sequenced by this
approach. Second, many genes are expressed at very
low levels or for very short periods and so may not be
represented in cDNA libraries.
A third approach to sequencing the genes of higher
eukaryotes is to use feature mapping (Krishnan et al.
1995) to help guide the choice of regions to be subjected to detailed analyses. In feature mapping, large
DNA fragments are cloned into a transposon-based
cosmid vector designed for generating nested deletions by in vivo transposition and simple bacteriological selection. These deletions place primer sites
throughout the DNA of interest at locations that are
easily determined by plasmid size (Fig. 7.8). An alternative way of using transposons to facilitate gene
sequencing is to insert them at random into the gene

133

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

(a)

SP6
strA

sacB

ori

kan

tet

Phenotype
Str
Tet Kan Suc
s

r

r

s

1

s

r

S

R

2

s

r

S

R

3

s

r

S

R

1

R

S

r

s

2

R

S

r

s

3

R

S

r

s

(b)

Deletions
in target

(c)

Deletions
in target

Fig. 7.8 Schematic representation of hypothetical nested deletions obtained using a transposon-based cosmid vector.
(a) Depiction of a hypothetical DNA clone. The purple portion represents cloned DNA, the filled arrowheads the transposon
sequences, and the purple half-arrows represent locations of primer binding sites. (b) Deletions extending into various sites
within the cloned fragment resulting from selection for resistance to sucrose, caused by loss of sacB, and tetracycline. (c) Deletions
resulting from selection for resistance to streptomycin, caused by loss of strA, and kanamycin. R/r indicates resistance and S/s
indicates sensitivity. (Redrawn from Krishnan et al. 1995, by permission of Oxford University Press.)

Tn
R)

b
(A

Tn(A

b R)

Vector

R
Ab )
Tn (

Transpose

Vector

Vector
Tn(Ab R)

Fig. 7.9 Random insertion of a transposon
into a DNA sequence cloned in a vector.
A plasmid containing the transposon is
mixed with the vector containing the
target sequence and incubated with
purified transposase. This results in in vitro
transposition with the transposon inserting
at different sites in the target sequence.

s
o be equen
et

d
ce

Ge
n

+

Vector

134

CHAPTER 7

of interest (Biery et al. 2000). This is done in vitro by
incubating the target DNA with a non-replicating
plasmid carrying a transposon encoding antibiotic
resistance and a transposase (Fig. 7.9). The target
DNA may be a plasmid, a cosmid, or a BAC and after
the in vitro transposition selection is made in vivo for
acquisition of the new antibiotic resistance determinant. Because of target immunity there is only one
insertion per target molecule and these occur at different positions. Unique priming sites are included
at the ends of the transposon and this permits DNA
sequences to be obtained from both strands of the
target DNA at the position of the insertion.
The sequencing of genomes requires a completely
different approach from that used to sequence genes.
The reason for this is quite simple. The maximum
length of continuous DNA sequence that can be
determined with Sanger sequencing is 500–1000
bases whereas genomes range in size from 0.5–1 Mb
to thousands of megabases. Consequently, the
genome must first be fragmented into thousands of
pieces of a size suitable for sequencing in such a way
that the order of the fragments can be reconstructed.
This requires special techniques and these are described in Chapter 17.

ing of large stretches of DNA. Rather, they are used
for applications where only short stretches of DNA
need to be sequenced, e.g. analysis of SNPs, mutation detection, resequencing of disease genes, partial expressed sequence tag (EST) sequencing, and
microbial typing by analysis of 16S rRNA genes
(Ronaghi 2001). Although Sanger sequencing is
the “gold standard”, it generates much more information than is necessary and is time consuming
because it involves electrophoresis.
Although many different methods have been proposed as alternatives to Sanger sequencing, most
have generated much initial excitement and then
disappeared without trace. The exception is sequencing by hybridization which now is performed using
microarrays (“gene chips”). Two newer methods of
sequencing short stretches of DNA that may be
widely adopted are pyrosequencing and massively
parallel signature sequencing (MPSS). Pyrosequencing most closely resembles Sanger sequencing in
that it involves DNA synthesis, whereas MPSS has
similarities to sequencing by hybridization. The
continued refinement of two methods for producing
gas-phase ions, electrospray ionization, and matrixassisted laser desorption ionization, has resulted in
methods for the rapid characterization of oligonucleotides by mass spectromety (Limbach et al. 1995).
This methodology has not been widely adopted for
sequencing and will not be discussed further here.

Alternatives to Sanger sequencing have been
developed and are particularly useful for
resequencing of DNA

Pyrosequencing permits sequence analysis in
real time

Over the last 20 years many research groups have
developed alternatives to the Sanger sequencing
method. Initially, the impetus for developing alternative methods was to increase the throughput of
sequence in terms of bases read per day per individual. The advent of multichannel automated
DNA sequencers, particularly the newer capillary
sequencers, obviated the need for alternative methods for de novo sequencing of DNA molecules larger
than a few megabases. Today, the rationale for using
these alternative methodologies is not the sequenc-

(Oligonucleotide)n + nucleotide
PPi + APS

Pyrosequencing is a DNA sequencing method that
involves determining which of the four bases is
incorporated at each step in the copying of a DNA
template. As DNA polymerase moves along a singlestranded template, each of the four nucleoside
triphosphates is fed sequentially and then removed.
If one of the four bases is incorporated then pyrophosphate is released and this is detected in an

Polymerase
ATP

(Oligonucleotide)n + 1 + PPi
ATP + sulfate

Sulfurylase
ATP + luciferin + O2

Luciferase

AMP + PPi + oxyluciferin + LIGHT

Fig. 7.10 The general principle of pyrosequencing. A polymerase catalyzes incorporation of nucleotides into a nucleic acid
chain. As each nucleotide is incorporated a pyrophosphate (PPi) molecule is released and incorporated into ATP by ATP
sulfurylase. On addition of luciferin and the enzyme luciferase, this ATP is degraded to AMP with the production of light.

135

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

enzyme cascade that emits light (Fig. 7.10). There
are two variants of the pyrosequencing technique
(Fig. 7.11). In solid-phase pyrosequencing (Ronaghi
et al. 1996), the DNA to be sequenced is immobilized
and a washing step is used to remove the excess substrate after each nucleotide addition. In liquid-phase
sequencing (Ronaghi et al. 1998b) a nucleotide
degrading enzyme (apyrase) is introduced to make a
four-enzyme system. Addition of this enzyme has
eliminated the need for a solid support and intermediate washing thereby enabling the pyrosequencing
reaction to be performed in a single tube. However,
without the washing step, inhibitory substances can
accumulate. The output from a typical pyrogram is
shown in Fig. 7.12. It is worth noting that because
the light emitted by the enzyme cascade is directly
proportional to the amount of pyrophosphate released,
it is easy to detect runs of 5–6 identical bases. For
longer runs of a single base it may be necessary to use
software algorithms to determine the exact number
of incorporated nucleotides.
Template preparation for pyrosequencing is very
easy. After generation of the template by the PCR,
unincorporated nucleotides and PCR primers are
removed. Two methods have been developed for
this purification step. In the first, biotinylated PCR
product is captured on magnetic beads, washed, and
denatured with alkali (Ronaghi et al. 1998a). In the
second method, akaline phosphatase or apyrase and
exonuclease I are added to the PCR product to
destroy the nucleotides and primers, respectively.
The sequencing primer is then added and the mixture rapidly heated and cooled. This inactivates
the enzymes, denatures the DNA and enables the
primers to anneal to the templates (Nordstrom et al.
2000a,b).
The acceptable read length of pyrosequencing
currently is about 200 nucleotides, i.e. much less

(a)
Polymerase

A CC T T GAG T A CC A TCT AGGA
AGA TCCT
dATP
PPi
Intensity

ATP-sulfurylase
ATP
Luciferase
Wash
Nucleotide and
polymerase

Light

Time

(b)
Polymerase

A CC T T GAG T A CC A TCT AGGA
AGA TCCT
dATP

Intensity

Apyrase

PPi
ATP-sulfurylase
ATP
Luciferase

(d)XMP
Light
Nucleotide

Time

Fig. 7.11 The two types of pyrosequencing. (a) Schematic
representation of the progress of the enzyme reaction in
solid-phase pyrosequencing. The four different nucleotides
are added stepwise to the immobilized primed DNA template
and the incorporation event is followed using the enzymes
ATP sulfurylase and luciferase. After each nucleotide
addition, a washing step is performed to allow iterative
addition. (b) Schematic representation of the progress
of the enzyme reaction in liquid-phase pyrosequencing.
The primed DNA template and four enzymes involved in
liquid-phase pyrosequencing are placed in the well of a
microtiter plate. The four different nucleotides are added
stepwise and incorporation is followed using the enzymes
ATP sulfurylase and luciferase. The nucleotides are
continuously degraded by an enzyme allowing the addition
of the subsequent nucleotide. dXTP indicates one of the four
nucleotides. (Redrawn with permission from Ronaghi 2001.)

A 4G T

2G

C

3T

4G 2T

G

C A G 2T

G

0.5 pmol

4

Fig. 7.12 Pyrogram of the raw
data obtained from liquid-phase
pyrosequencing. Proportional
signals are obtained for one, two,
three, and four base incorporations.
Nucleotide addition, according
to the order of nucleotides, is
indicated below the pyrogram
and the obtained sequence is
indicated above the pyrogram.
(Redrawn with permission from
Ronaghi 2001.)

2 min

3
2

1

A G T C A G T C A G T C A G T C A G T C A G T C A G

136

CHAPTER 7

than is achieved with Sanger sequencing. However,
many modifications are being made to the reaction
conditions to extend the read length. For example,
the addition of ssDNA-binding protein to the reaction
mixture increases read length, facilitates sequencing of difficult templates, and provides flexibility in
primer design. The availability of automated systems
for pyrosequencing (Ronaghi 2001) is facilitating
the use of the technique for high-throughput analyses. A key benefit of the technique is the absence of
a requirement to label the test sequence.

....AGTCCCTTGGCTCGCAATG.... DNA fragment

CC

Hybridization
onto oligomer
matrix

It is possible to sequence DNA by
hybridization using microarrays
The principle of sequencing by hybridization can
best be explained by starting with a simple example.
Consider the tetranucleotide CTCA, whose complementary strand is TGAG, and a matrix of the whole
set of 43 = 64 trinucleotides. This tetranucleotide
will specifically hybridize only with complementary
trinucleotides TGA and GAG, revealing the presence
of these blocks in the complementary sequence.
From this the sequence TGAG can be reconstructed.
If instead of using trinucleotides, 48 = 65,536
octanucleotides were used, it should be possible to
sequence DNA fragments up to 200 bases long
(Bains & Smith 1988, Lysov et al. 1988, Southern
1988, Drmanac et al. 1989). The length of the target
that can be analyzed is approximately equal to the
square root of the number of oligonucleotides in the
array (Southern et al. 1992). Two different experimental configurations have been developed for the
hybridization reaction. Either the target sequence
may be immobilized and oligonucleotides labeled
or the oligonucleotides may be immobilized and the
target sequence labeled. Each method has advantages
over the other for particular applications. It is an
advantage to label the oligonucleotides to analyze a
large number of target sequences for fingerprinting.
On the other hand, for applications that require large
numbers of oligonucleotides of different sequence, it
is advantageous to immobilize oligonucleotides and
use the target sequence as the labeled probe.
Drmanac et al. have pioneered the first approach.
For example, exons 5–8 of the TP53 gene were
PCR-amplified from 12 samples, spotted onto nylon
filters and individually probed with 8192 noncomplementary radiolabeled 7-base oligos (Drmanac
et al. 1998). In this way, 13 distinct homozygous or
heterozygous mutations in these 12 samples were
detected by determining which oligonucleotide probes

a

b

c

d
A GT CCCT
GT CCCT
T CCCT
CCCT
CCT
CT

T
Sequence
determination
TG
TG G
T G GC
T G GC T
T G GC T C

...A G T C C C T T G G C T C...

Fig. 7.13 Schematic representation of sequencing by
hybridization where the sequence being examined is labeled
and hybridized with immobilized oligomers. (Reprinted from
Hoheisel 1994 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

hybridized to the immobilized targets. The downside
of this approach is the need to perform thousands of
separate hybridization reactions.
The feasibility of the second approach (Fig. 7.13)
was first demonstrated by Southern et al. (1992).
They developed technology for making complete sets
of oligonucleotides of defined length and covalently
attaching them to the surface of a glass plate by
synthesizing them in situ. A device carrying all
octapurine sequences was used to explore factors
affecting molecular hybridization of the tethered
oligonucleotides and computer-aided methods for
analyzing the data were developed. It was quickly
realized that the light-directed synthetic (photolithography) methods routinely used in the semiconductor industry could be combined with standard
oligonucleotide synthesis to prepare microarrays
carrying hundreds of thousands of oligonucleotides
of predetermined sequence (Fodor et al. 1993, Pease
et al. 1994, Southern 1996a).

137

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

1.28 cm

AFFYMETRIX

Probe
array

Wafer
49 probe arrays
per wafer
(not to scale)

Probes
1.28 cm

Feature

Fig. 7.14 Structure
of a sequencing
microchip. (Courtesy
of Dr. M. Chee,
Affymetrix.)

Manufacturing a microarray is deceptively simple.
In the first step a mercury lamp is shone through a
standard computer-industry photolithographic mask
onto the synthesis surface. This activates specific
areas for chemical coupling with a nucleoside which
itself contains a 5′ protecting group. Further exposure to light removes this group, leaving a 5′hydroxyl group capable of reacting with another
nucleoside in the subsequent cycle. The choice of
which nucleoside to activate is thus controlled by
the composition of the mask. Successive rounds of
deprotection and chemistry can result in an exponential increase in oligonucleotide complexity on a
chip for a linear number of steps. For example, it
requires only 4 × 15 = 60 cycles to synthesize a
complete set of ~1 billion different 15 mers. The
space occupied by each specific oligonucleotide is
termed a feature and may house at least 1 million
identical molecules (Fig. 7.14). A standard 1.6 cm
square chip can house more than 1 million different
oligos with a spacing of 1 µm, cf. the computer
industry which routinely achieves resolution at
0.3 µm!
Although microchips have not been used for de
novo sequencing of a genome, they have been used
for resequencing genomes as exemplified by human
mitochondrial DNA (Chee et al. 1996). For this purpose a 4L tiled array is set up in which L corresponds
to the length of the sequence to be analyzed. The
sequence is probed with a series of oligomers of
length P which exactly match the target sequence
except for one position which is systematically substituted with each of the four bases A, T, G, or C. In
the example shown in Fig. 7.15, a tiled array of 15
mers varied at position 7 from the 3′ end is used. This

GeneChipTM probe array
16,000 to more than 100,000
individual features
per probe array
(actual size)

0.005 cm
Millions of identical
probes per feature
(not to scale)

is known as a P15,7 array. To use such an array, the
DNA to be analyzed is amplified by long-range PCR.
Fluorescently labeled RNA is then prepared by in
vitro transcription and this is hybridized to the array.
The hybridization patterns are imaged with a highresolution confocal scanner and a typical result is
shown in Fig. 7.15. For the purpose of resequencing
the human mitochondrial genome (L = 16,569 bp)
with a tiled array of P15,7 probes then a total of
66,276 probes (4 × 16,569) of the possible ~109 15
mers would be required.
Microchips are particularly useful for detecting
mutations and polymorphisms, particularly SNPs,
(Chee et al. 1996, Hacia et al. 1996, 1998, Kozal et al.
1996). As an example, consider again the mitochondrial genome. Chee et al. (1996) prepared a P25,13
tiling array consisting of 136,528 synthesis cells,
each 35 µm square in size. In addition to a 4L tiling
across the genome, the array contained a set of
probes representing a single-base deletion at every
position across the genome and sets of probes
designed to match a range of specific mtDNA haplotypes. After hybridization of fluorescently labeled
target RNA, 99% of the sequence could be read
correctly simply by identifying the highest intensity
in each column of four substitution probes. The
array also was used to detect three disease-causing
mutations in a patient with hereditary optic neuropathy (Fig. 7.16). A refinement to this method
also has been developed. Ideally, the hybridization
signals from the reference and test DNAs should
be compared by hybridization to the same array.
This can be carried out by using a two-color labeling
and detection scheme in which the reference is
labeled with phycoerythrin (red) and the target

138

CHAPTER 7

(a)

5’ . . T G A A C T G T AT C C G A C A T . .
3’
t ga c a tAg g c t g t ag
t ga c a t Cg g c t g t a g
t g a c a t Gg g c t g t a g
t ga c a t Tg g c t g t ag
3’
g a c a t a A g c t g t a ga
g a c a t a C g c t g t a ga
g a c a t a G g c t g t a ga
g a c a t a T g c t g t a ga

(b)

5’ . . T G A A C T G T A C T C G A C A T . .
3’
t ga c a tAg g c t g t ag
t ga c a t Cg g c t g t a g
t g a c a t Gg g c t g t a g
t ga c a t Tg g c t g t ag
3’
g a c a t a A g c t g t a ga
g a c a t a C g c t g t a ga
g a c a t aG g c t g t a ga
g a c a t a T g c t g t a ga

(c)

5’ T G A A C T G T A T C C G A C A T
A
C
G
T

5’ T G A A C T G T A C C C G A C A T
A
C
G
T
16,493

Fig. 7.15 Design and use of a 4L tiled array. Each position
in the target sequence (uppercase letters) is queried by a set of
four probes on the chip (lowercase letters), identical except at
a single position, termed the substitution position, which is
either A, C, G, or T (bold black indicates complementarity,
green a mismatch). Two sets of probes are shown, querying
adjacent positions in target. (b) Effect of a change in the target
sequence. The probes are the same as in (a), but the target
now contains a single-base substitution (base C, shown in
green and arrowed). The probe set querying the changed base
still has a perfect match (the G probe). However, probes in
adjacent sets that overlap the altered target position now
have either one or two mismatches (green) instead of zero or
one, because they were designed to match the target shown
in (a). (c) Hybridization to a 4L tiled array and detection of a
base change in the target. The array shown was designed to
the mt1 sequence. (Top) Hybridization to mt1. The
substitution used in each row of probes is indicated to the left
of the image. The target sequence can be read 5′ to 3′ from left
to right as the complement of the substitution base with the
brightest signal. With hybridization to mt2 (bottom), which
differs from mt1 in this region by a T → C transition, the G
probe at position 16,493 is now a perfect match, with the
other three probes having single-base mismatches (A 5, C 3,
G 37, T 4 counts). However, at flanking positions, the probes
have either single- or double-base mismatches, because the
mt2 transition now occurs away from the query position.
(Reprinted from Chee et al. 1996 by permission of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

with fluorescein (green). By processing the reference
and target together, experimental variability during
the fragmentation, hybridization, washing, and
detection steps is eliminated.
Variations of the microarray method
It should be noted that there are two variants of the
hybridization-based method of DNA sequencing.
The first approach is exemplified by the mitochondrial analysis described above. That is, oligos are used
that are complementary to a significant subset of
sequence changes of interest and one measures gain
of hybridization signal to these oligos in test samples
relative to reference samples. Relative “gain” of signal by these oligos indicates a sequence change. In
this respect, the microarray is being used in an analogous fashion to a conventional dot blot. This
“gain-of-signal” approach allows for a partial scan of
a DNA segment for all possible sequence variations.
An array designed to interrogate both strands of a
target of length N for all possible single nucleotide
substitutions would consist of 8N oligos of length
20–25 nucleotides, i.e. 80,000 oligos for a 10 kb
sequence. To interrogate the same DNA target for all
deletions of a particular length would require an
additional 2N oligos, i.e. 100,000 oligos if screening
for deletions of 1–5 bp. However, interrogating both
target strands for insertions of length X requires
2(4X)N oligos, i.e. 27,280,000 oligos if looking for all
1–5 bp insertions!
In the loss-of-signal approach, sequence variations
are scored by quantitating relative losses of hybridization signal to perfect match oligonucleotide probes
in test samples relative to wild-type reference targets.
Ideally, a homozygous sequence change results in
a complete loss of hybridization signal to perfect
match probes interrogating the region surrounding
the sequence change (Fig. 7.17). For heterozygous
sequence variations the signal loss theoretically is
50%. With this approach, an array designed to interrogate both strands of a 10 kb sequence for all possible sequences requires just 20,000 oligos. An added
advantage is that multiple probes contribute to the
detection of a sequence variation (see Fig. 7.17)
thereby minimizing random sources of error caused
by hybridization signal fluctuations – a problem with
the gain-of-signal approach. The disadvantage of
the loss-of-signal method is that the identity of the
mutation cannot be determined without subsequent
conventional sequencing.

139

Sequencing genes and short stretches of DNA

(c)

(a)
OH
13 708

3460
1 cm

3460 g

a

4216 t

c

13 708 g

a

A
C
G
T

16 569 bp

4216

11 778

100 µm

(b)

11 778

1 mm

Fig. 7.16 Use of a sequencing microchip to analyze the human mitochondrial genome. (a) An image of the array hybridized to
16.6 kb of mitochondrial target RNA (L strand). The 16,569 bp map of the genome is shown, and the H strand origin of replication
(OH), located in the control region, is indicated. (b) A portion of the hybridization pattern magnified. In each column there are five
probes. A, C, G, T, and ∆, from top to bottom. The ∆ probe has a single base deletion instead of a substitution and hence is 24 instead
of 25 bases in length. The scale is indicated by the bar beneath the image. Although there is considerable sequence-dependent
intensity variation, most of the array can be read directly. The image was collected at a resolution of ~100 pixels per probe cell.
(c) The ability of the array to detect and read single base differences in a 16.6 kb sample is illustrated. Two different target
sequences were hybridized in parallel to different chips. The hybridization patterns are compared for four positions in the sequence.
Only the P25,13 probes are shown. The top panel of each pair shows the hybridization of the mt3 target, which matches the chip P0
sequence at these positions. The lower panel shows the pattern generated by a sample from a patient with Leber’s hereditary optic
neuropathy (LHON). Three known pathogenic mutations, LHON3460, LHON4216, and LHON13,708, are clearly detected. For
comparison, the fourth panel in the set shows a region around position 11,778 that is identical in both samples. (Reprinted from
Chee et al. 1996 by permission of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

A
5’
3’

Target
3’

5’
1

Probes that
hybridize to
selected nucleotide

Fig. 7.17 (right) Oligonucleotide probes used in loss of
hybridization signal sequence analysis. Ideally each
target nucleotide position contributes to hybridization
to a set of N overlapping N-base perfect match probes in an
oligonucleotide array. In this example, hybridization to
25 overlapping 25-base probes is affected by changes in a
single target nucleotide. (Redrawn with permission from
Hacia 1999.)

Contig of overlapping
25mer perfect match
probes with single
nucleotide overhangs

25

3’

5’

140

CHAPTER 7

Availability of microarrays
Five different components are required for work with
microarrays.
1 The chip itself with its special surface.
2 The device for producing the microarrays by
spotting the oligos onto the chip or for their in situ
synthesis.
3 A fluidic system for hybridization of the test DNA
to the immobilized oligos.
4 A scanner to read the micoarrays after
hybridization.
5 Software programs to quantify and interpret the
results.
All of the above are commercially available
(Meldrum 2000b). In addition, micoarrays carrying
sets of oligos matched to particular sequences are
also commercially available. However, it must be
stressed that the value of the data obtained with a
microarray depends critically on the quality of the
arraying. Fortunately the laying down of arrays is
becoming easier thanks to the use of bubble jet technology (Okamoto et al. 2000), maskless in situ synthesis of oligonucleotides (Singh-Gasson et al. 1999),
and improvements in microarray surface chemistry
(Beier & Hoheisel 2000). This technology is discussed in more detail in Chapter 20.
Massively parallel signature sequencing
can be used to monitor RNA abundance
This sequencing method was developed by Brenner
et al. (2000) to enable them to undertake a global
analysis of gene regulation. This topic is covered in
more detail later (p. 410) but essentially the relative
abundance of different mRNAs is estimated by
sequencing a large number of clones from representational cDNA libraries. Because the probability of
finding a particular message is proportional to the
number of clones sequenced, a large-scale sequencing project is required to detect very low abundance
mRNAs if traditional Sanger sequencing is used.
Instead, Brenner et al. (2000) have developed a

method where a short “signature” sequence can
be determined simultaneously for every cDNA in a
library.
Methods are being developed for sequencing
single DNA molecules
Of the various DNA sequencing methods described
above, only Sanger sequencing has been used in
large-scale sequencing projects. The other methods
are restricted to resequencing. Two disadvantages
of the Sanger method are a need to amplify the
DNA before sequencing and the requirement for
electrophoresis to separate the DNA ladders that
are generated. Both of these disadvantages would
be eliminated if single DNA molecules could be
sequenced directly but this in turn generates a
need for exquisite sensitivity. In recent years considerable progress has been made in detecting the
fluorescence from single molecules and the technology now is being applied to single-molecule DNA
sequencing (Braslavsky et al. 2003, Ramanathan et
al. 2004). It remains to be seen if either of these
methods, or derivatives of them, achieve wide-scale
acceptance.

Suggested reading
Chee M. et al. (1996) Accessing genetic information
with high-density arrays. Science 274, 610–14.
This is a classic paper that describes in detail the use of DNA
arrays to resequence the human mitochondrial genome and
the identification of base changes in certain diseases.
Drmanac R. et al. (2002) Sequencing by hybridization
(SBH): advantages, achievements and opportunities.
Advances in Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology
77, 75–101.
This review describes sequencing by hybridization in much
greater detail than is possible in this chapter.
Paegel B.M., Blazej R.G. & Mathies R.A. (2003) Microfluidic devices for DNA sequencing: sample preparation and electrophoretic analysis. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology 14, 42–50.
This slightly futuristic review describes how all the different
stages of DNA sequencing from clone isolation to electrophoretic analysis could be combined into a single device.

CHAPTER 8
Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and
protein engineering

Introduction
The generation and characterization of mutants is
an essential component of any study on structure–
function relationships. Knowledge of the threedimensional structure of a protein, RNA species,
or DNA regulatory element (e.g. a promoter) can
provide clues to the way in which they function but
proof that the correct mechanism has been elucidated requires the analysis of mutants that have
amino acid or nucleotide changes at key residues
(see Box 8.2).
Classically, mutants are generated by treating
the test organism with chemical or physical agents
that modify DNA (mutagens). This method of mutagenesis has been extremely successful, as witnessed
by the growth of molecular biology and functional
genomics, but suffers from a number of disadvantages. First, any gene in the organism can be mutated
and the frequency with which mutants occur in the
gene of interest can be very low. This means that
selection strategies have to be developed. Second,
even when mutants with the desired phenotype are
isolated, there is no guarantee that the mutation has
occurred in the gene of interest. Third, prior to the
development of gene-cloning and sequencing techniques, there was no way of knowing where in the
gene the mutation had occurred and whether it
arose by a single base change, an insertion of DNA,
or a deletion.
As techniques in molecular biology have developed, so that the isolation and study of a single gene
is not just possible but routine, so mutagenesis has
also been refined. Instead of crudely mutagenizing
many cells or organisms and then analyzing many
thousands or millions of offspring to isolate a desired
mutant, it is now possible to change specifically any
given base in a cloned DNA sequence. This technique
is known as site-directed mutagenesis. It has become
a basic tool of gene manipulation, for it simplifies
DNA manipulations that in the past required a great

deal of ingenuity and hard work, e.g. the creation or
elimination of cleavage sites for restriction endonucleases. The importance of site-directed mutagenesis
goes beyond gene structure–function relationships
for the technique enables mutant proteins with novel
properties of value to be created (protein engineering).
Such mutant proteins may have only minor changes
but it is not uncommon for entire domains to be
deleted or new domains added.
Primer extension (the single-primer method)
is a simple method for site-directed mutation
The first method of site-directed mutagenesis to
be developed was the single-primer method (Gillam
et al. 1980, Zoller & Smith 1983). As originally
described the method involves in vitro DNA synthesis
with a chemically synthesized oligonucleotide (7–20
nucleotides long) that carries a base mismatch with
the complementary sequence. As shown in Fig. 8.1,
the method requires that the DNA to be mutated
is available in single-stranded form, and cloning
the gene in M13-based vectors makes this easy.
However, DNA cloned in a plasmid and obtained
in duplex form can also be converted to a partially
single-stranded molecule that is suitable (DalbadieMcFarland et al. 1982).
The synthetic oligonucleotide primes DNA synthesis and is itself incorporated into the resulting
heteroduplex molecule. After transformation of
the host E. coli, this heteroduplex gives rise to homoduplexes whose sequences are either that of the
original wild-type DNA or that containing the mutated
base. The frequency with which mutated clones arise,
compared with wild-type clones, may be low. In
order to pick out mutants, the clones can be screened
by nucleic acid hybridization with 32P-labeled oligonucleotide as probe. Under suitable conditions of
stringency, i.e. temperature and cation concentration, a positive signal will be obtained only with
mutant clones. This allows ready detection of the

142

CHAPTER 8

T

A

Chemically synthesized
oligonucleotide

Anneal

A

*
A G G C
C
AC
GT G
*

T

AC
GT G

A

A

Single-stranded
M13 recombinant

TCAGGCT

(1) DNA polymerase + 4dNTPs
(2) T4 DNA ligase + ATP

A

A

*
A G G C
AC
GT G
*

T

T

C

Transform E. coli

A

T

C

A G G C
AC
GT G
*

Screen plaques with 32P-labeled
oligonucleotide as hybridization
probe
Isolate mutant

desired mutant (Wallace et al. 1981, Traboni
et al. 1983). It is prudent to check the sequence of the
mutant directly by DNA sequencing, in order to
check that the procedure has not introduced other
adventitious changes. This was a particular necessity with early versions of the technique which made
use of E. coli DNA polymerase. The more recent use
of the high-fidelity DNA polymerases has minimized
the problem of extraneous mutations as well as
shortening the time for copying the second strand.
Also, these polymerases do not “strand-displace”
the oligomer, a process which would eliminate the
original mutant oligonucleotide.
A variation of the procedure (Fig. 8.2) outlined
above involves oligonucleotides containing inserted
or deleted sequences. As long as stable hybrids are
formed with single-stranded wild-type DNA, prim-

A

A

Mutant

T

A

A G G C
C
AC
GT G
*

T

T

Wild-type

Fig. 8.1
Oligonucleotidedirected mutagenesis.
Asterisks indicate
mismatched bases.
Originally the Klenow
fragment of DNA
polymerase was used,
but now this has been
largely replaced with
T7 polymerase.

ing of in vitro DNA synthesis can occur, ultimately
giving rise to clones corresponding to the inserted
or deleted sequence (Wallace et al. 1980, Norrander
et al. 1983).
The single-primer method has a number of
deficiencies
The efficiency with which the single-primer method
yields mutants is dependent upon several factors.
The double-stranded heteroduplex molecules that
are generated will be contaminated both by any
single-stranded non-mutant template DNA that has
remained uncopied and by partially double-stranded
molecules. The presence of these species considerably
reduces the proportion of mutant progeny. They
can be removed by sucrose gradient centrifugation

143

Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and protein engineering

Fig. 8.2
Oligonucleotidedirected mutagenesis
used for multiple point
mutation, insertion
mutagenesis, and
deletion mutagenesis.

Multiple point
mutations

Insertion
mutagenesis

Deletion
mutagenesis

Mutant oligonucleotide
with multiple (four)
single base pair
mismatches

Mutant oligonucleotide
carrying a sequence to
be inserted sandwiched
between two regions
with sequences
complementary to sites
on either sides of the
target site in the
template

Mutant oligonucleotide
spanning the region to
be deleted, binding to
two separate sites, one
on either side of the
target

or by agarose gel electrophoresis, but this is timeconsuming and inconvenient.
Following transformation and in vivo DNA
synthesis, segregation of the two strands of the
heteroduplex molecule can occur, yielding a mixed
population of mutant and non-mutant progeny.
Mutant progeny have to be purified away from
parental molecules, and this process is complicated
by the cell’s mismatch repair system. In theory, the
mismatch repair system should yield equal numbers
of mutant and non-mutant progeny, but in practice
mutants are counterselected. The major reason for
this low yield of mutant progeny is that the methyldirected mismatch repair system of E. coli favors the
repair of non-methylated DNA. In the cell, newly
synthesized DNA strands that have not yet been
methylated are preferentially repaired at the position
of the mismatch, thereby eliminating a mutation. In
a similar way, the non-methylated in vitro-generated
mutant strand is repaired by the cell so that the
majority of progeny are wild type (Kramer et al.
1984). The problems associated with the mismatch
repair system can be overcome by using host strains
carrying the mutL, mutS, or mutH mutations, which
prevent the methyl-directed repair of mismatches.
A heteroduplex molecule with one mutant and
one non-mutant strand must inevitably give rise
to both mutant and non-mutant progeny upon
replication. It would be desirable to suppress the
growth of non-mutants, and various strategies have
been developed with this in mind (Kramer, B. 1984,
Carter et al. 1985, Kunkel 1985, Sayers & Eckstein
1991).
Another disadvantage of all of the primer extension methods is that they require a single-stranded
template. In contrast, with PCR-based mutagenesis

(see below) the template can be single-stranded or
double-stranded, circular or linear. In comparison
with single-stranded DNAs, double-stranded DNAs
are much easier to prepare. Also, gene inserts are in
general more stable with double-stranded DNAs.
The issues raised above account for the fact that
most of the mutagenesis kits that are available commercially make use of multiple primers and doublestranded templates. For example, in the GeneEditorTM
system (Fig. 8.3), two primers are used. One of these
primers encodes the mutation to be inserted into
the target gene. The second encodes a mutation that
enhances the antibiotic resistance properties of the
ampicillin-resistance determinant on the vector by
conferring resistance to ceftazidime as well. After
extending the two primers to yield an intact circular
DNA molecule, the mutated plasmid is transformed
into E. coli and selection made for the enhanced
antibiotic resistance. Plasmids encoding the enhanced
antibiotic resistance also should carry the mutated
target gene. In a variant of this procedure, the vector
has two antibiotic resistance determinants (ampicillin
and tetracycline) but one of these (AmpR) carries a
mutation. Again, two primers are used: one carrying
the mutation to be introduced to the target gene
and the other restores ampicillin resistance. After
the in vitro mutagenesis steps, the plasmid is transformed into E. coli and selection made for ampicillin
resistance.
Methods have been developed that simplify
the process of making all possible amino acid
substitutions at a selected site
Using site-directed mutagenesis it is possible to
change two or three adjacent nucleotides so that

144

CHAPTER 8

Insert

AmpR

1. Alkaline denature dsDNA
template, anneal the
mutagenic oligonucleotide
and selection oligonucleotide.

2. Synthesize the mutant strand
with T4 DNA polymerase and
T4 DNA ligase.
3. Transform competent cells
with the mutagenesis
reaction. Grow overnight
with the antibiotic selection
mix.

Insert

+

AmpR + new
resistance
4. Isolate plasmid DNA
and transform into
competent cells.
Select mutants on
media containing
ampicillin and the
antibiotic selection
mix.

+

AmpR

Mutant

Fig. 8.3 The GeneEditorTM system for generating a high
frequency of mutations using site-directed mutagenesis.

every possible amino acid substitution is made at
a site of interest. This generates a requirement for
19 different mutagenic oligonucleotides assuming
only one codon will be used for each substitution.
An alternative way of changing one amino acid
to all the alternatives is cassette mutagenesis. This
involves replacing a fragment of the gene with
different fragments containing the desired codon
changes. It is a simple method for which the efficiency
of mutagenesis is close to 100%. However, if it is
desired to change the amino acids at two sites to all
the possible alternatives then 400 different oligos
or fragments would be required and the practicality
of the method becomes questionable. One solution
to this problem is to use doped oligonucleotides
(Fig. 8.4). Many different variations of this technique
have been developed and the interested reader should
consult the review of Neylon (2004).
The PCR can be used for site-directed
mutagenesis
Early work on the development of the PCR method of
DNA amplification showed its potential for mutagenesis (Scharf et al. 1986). Single bases mismatched
between the amplification primer and the template
become incorporated into the template sequence as
a result of amplification (Fig. 8.5). Higuchi et al.
(1988) have described a variation of the basic method
which enables a mutation in a PCR-produced DNA
fragment to be introduced anywhere along its length.
Two primary PCR reactions produce two overlapping
DNA fragments, both bearing the same mutation in
the overlap region. The overlap in sequence allows
the fragments to hybridize (Fig. 8.5). One of the two
possible hybrids is extended by DNA polymerase
to produce a duplex fragment. The other hybrid
has recessed 5′ ends and, since it is not a substrate
for the polymerase, is effectively lost from the reaction

Arg Glu
Ile * * * Glu Met * * * Glu Ala
Val Ser Met
G
T CG A G A A A T C N N G
C G AG A T G N N C G A A GCG G T T AGC A T G
C T T T AG I I I C T C T A C I I I C T T CGC C A A T C

AGC T
XhoI

GTAC
SphI

Fig. 8.4 Mutagenesis by means of doped oligonucleotides. During synthesis of the upper strand of the oligonucleotide, a mixture
of all four nucleotides is used at the positions indicated by the letter N. When the lower strand is synthesized, inosine (I) is inserted
at the positions shown. The double-stranded oligonucleotide is inserted into the relevant position of the vector.

145

Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and protein engineering

Primer A
3‘

Primer A‘
5‘

5‘

3‘

PCR

PCR

3‘

5‘
Primer B

5‘
Primer C

3‘

PCR

3‘

PCR

5‘

5‘

3‘

Mix, denature and anneal
DNA polymerase

Fig. 8.5

Site-directed
mutagenesis by means
of the PCR. The steps
shown in the top-left
corner of the diagram
show the basic PCR
method of mutagenesis.
The bottom half of the
figure shows how the
mutation can be moved
to the middle of a DNA
molecule. Primers are
shown in bold and
primers A and A′ are
complementary.

3‘
5‘

5‘

+

5‘
3‘

3‘

3‘

5‘

DNA polymerase

5‘

mixture. As with conventional primer-extension
mutagenesis, deletions and insertions can also be
created.
The method of Higuchi et al. (1988) is rather complicated in that it requires four primers and three PCRs
(a pair of PCRs to amplify the overlapping segments
and a third PCR to fuse the two segments). Commercial suppliers of reagents have developed simpler
methods and two of these methods are described
below. Two features of PCR mutagenesis should be
noted. First, the procedure is not restricted to single
base changes: by selecting appropriate primers it is
possible to make insertions and deletions as well.
Second, Taq polymerase copies DNA with low fidelity
(see p. 29) and there is a significant risk of extraneous mutations being introduced during the amplification reaction. This problem can be minimized
by using a high fidelity thermostable polymerase,
and a high template concentration, and fewer than
10 cycles of amplification.
In the ExsiteTM method (Fig. 8.6), both strands
of the vector carrying the target gene are amplified
using the PCR but one of the primers carries the

3‘

+
PCR with primers B and C

desired mutation. This results in the production of a
population of linear duplexes carrying the mutated
gene that is contaminated with a low level of the
original circular template DNA. If the template DNA
was derived from an E. coli cell with an intact restriction modification system then it will be methylated
and will be sensitive to restriction by the DpnI endonuclease. The linear DNA produced by amplification
will be resistant to DpnI cleavage and after circularization by blunt-end ligation can be recovered by
transformation into E. coli. Any hybrid molecules
consisting of a single strand of the methylated
template DNA and unmethylated amplicon also will
be destroyed by the endonuclease.
In the GeneTailorTM method (Fig. 8.7), the target
DNA is methylated in vitro before the mutagenesis step
and overlapping primers are used. Once again, linear
amplicons are produced that carry the desired mutation but in this case they are transformed directly into
E. coli. The host-cell repair enzymes circularize the
linear mutated DNA while the McrBC endonuclease
digests the methylated template DNA leaving only
unmethylated, mutated product.

146

CHAPTER 8

Methods are available to enable mutations
to be introduced randomly throughout a
target gene

Insert

Add PCR primers
Mismatch

PCR
Mutation

Add DpnI endonuclease

T4 DNA ligase

Mutated
insert

Transform
competent
cells

The methods described above enable defined mutations to be introduced at defined locations within
a gene and are of particular value in determining
structure–activity relationships. However, if the
objective of a study is to select mutants with altered
and/or improved characteristics then a better approach is to mutate the gene at random and then
positively select those with the desired properties.
Methods for the random mutagenesis of cloned
genes are described in this section and the next while
selection methods are described later (p. 148).
It is well known that the polymerase chain reaction is error prone and that there is a high probability
of base changes in amplicons. However, even the
relatively low fidelity Taq polymerase is too accurate
to be of value in generating mutant libraries. Nevertheless, increases in error rates can be obtained in a
number of ways. One of the commonest ways of
achieving this is to introduce a small amount of Mn2+,
in place of the normal Mg2+, and to include an excess
of dGTP and dTTP relative to the other two nucleotide
triphosphates. With this protocol it is possible to
achieve error rates of one nucleotide per kilobase
(Caldwell & Joyce 1994, Cirino et al. 2003). Even
higher rates of mutagenesis can be achieved by using
nucleoside triphosphate analogs (Zaccolo et al. 1996).
The methodologies for error-prone PCR all involve
either a misincorporation process in which the polymerase adds an incorrect base to the growing daughter strand or a lack of proofreading ability on the part
of the polymerase. It might be expected that they
generate a completely random set of mutants but in
reality the mutant libraries produced are heavily
biased. There are three sources of bias. First, the
inherent characteristics of the DNA polymerase used
mean that some types of errors are more common
than others (Cirino et al. 2003). The second source of
bias arises because of the nature of the genetic code.
For example, a single point mutation in a valine
codon can change it to one encoding phenylalanine,
leucine, isoleucine, alanine, aspartate, or glycine but

Fig. 8.6 (left) The ExsiteTM method for generating mutants
using the PCR. The parental plasmid (shown in blue) carrying
the target gene is derived from a restriction-proficient strain of
E. coli and so is methylated. This makes it sensitive to the DpnI
endonuclease and hence it can be eliminated selectively from
the final PCR mixture.

Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and protein engineering

Methylation

Methylate plasmid DNA
with DNA methylase.

Methylated
plasmid

Mutagenesis

Transformation

Mutated
plasmid

Amplify the plasmid in a
mutagenesis reaction with
two overlapping primers, one
of which contains the target
mutation. The product is
linear, double-stranded DNA
containing the mutation.

Transform the mutagenesis
mixture into wild type E. coli.
The host cell circularizes the
linear mutated DNA, and
McrBC endonuclease in the
host cell digests the
methylated template DNA,
leaving only unmethylated,
mutated product.

in a protein with other natural amino acids, e.g. the
replacement of a phenylalanine residue with tyrosine,
tryptophan, histidine, etc. The ability to incorporate
unnatural amino acids into proteins in vivo would
permit the production of large quantities of proteins
with novel properties. For example, the replacement
of methionine with selenomethionine facilitates the
determination of the three-dimensional structure
of proteins (Hendrickson et al. 1990). While it is
possible to “force” bacteria to incorporate unnatural
amino acids into proteins (for review, see Link et al.
2003) a better method is to engineer the translational apparatus. This is achieved by generating
an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and tRNA pair that
function independently of the synthetases and tRNAs
endogenous to E. coli (Wang et al. 2001a, Santoro
et al. 2003). Such a pair are said to be orthogonal
and satisfy a number of criteria:
•

•

•
Fig. 8.7 The GeneTailorTM method for generating mutants
using the PCR.

two or three adjacent point mutations are required
to change it to one encoding all the other amino
acids. The final source of bias arises from the process
of amplification. A mutant that is generated early in
the amplification process will be over-represented in
the final library compared to one that arises in later
rounds of amplification.
Error-prone PCR protocols are effective as a means
of randomly changing one amino acid into another
in the final protein. However, sometimes it might be
desirable to explore the effect of randomly deleting or
inserting amino acids and this is possible using the
random insertion/deletion (RID) process devised by
Murakami et al. (2002, 2003). The method is based
on ligating an insertion or deletion cassette at nearly
random locations within the gene.
Altered proteins can be produced by inserting
unusual amino acids during protein synthesis
All the mutation methods described above result in
the replacement of one or more amino acid residues

147

The tRNA is not a substrate for any of the endogenous E. coli synthetases but functions efficiently in
protein translation.
The orthogonal synthetase efficiently aminoacylates the orthogonal tRNA whose anticodon has
been modified to recognize an amber (UAG) or opal
(UGA) stop codon.
The synthetase does not aminoacylate any of the
endogenous E. coli tRNAs.

Archaebacteria appear to be an especially good source
of orthogonal pairs for use in E. coli.
Modifying the anticodon on the tRNA such that it
recognizes amber and opal codons is relatively easy.
However, the synthetase also needs to be modified
such that it charges the cognate tRNA with unusual
amino acids more efficiently than the normal amino
acid. To do this a library of synthetase mutants is generated and subjected to positive selection based on
suppression of an amber codon located in a plasmidborne gene encoding chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (Wang et al. 2001a). Using this approach the
tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase of Methanococcus jannaschii
was modified to permit the site-specific incorporation
into proteins of phenylalanine and tyrosine derivatives such as O-allyltyrosine, p-acetyl-phenylalanine,
and p-benzoyl-phenylalanine. These modified amino
acids can be used as sites for chemical modification of
the protein in vitro after purification, e.g. the attachment of fluorescent labels (Chin et al. 2003, Link et al.
2003).
There have been two significant developments
of the above technique. In the first of these, Zhang

148

CHAPTER 8

et al. (2003) have shown that chemical modification
of proteins can occur in vivo as well as in vitro. For
example, m-acetylphenylalanine was substituted
for Lys7 of the cytoplasmic domain of protein Z and
for Arg200 of the outer membrane protein LamB. On
addition of a membrane-permeable dye (fluorescein
hydrazide) to intact cells, these modified proteins were
selectively labeled. In the case of cells expressing
the modified LamB derivative, labeling was possible
with a range of fluorescein derivatives that are not
membrane permeable. The second development is
the ability to charge the orthogonal tRNA with glycosylated amino acids. For example, Zhang et al. (2004)
were able to synthesize in E. coli a myoglobin derivative containing β–N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) at
a defined position. This GlcNAc moiety was recognized by a saccharide-binding protein and could be
modified by a galactosyltransferase.
Phage display can be used to facilitate the
selection of mutant peptides
In phage display, a segment of foreign DNA is inserted
into either a phagemid or an infectious filamentous

Promoter

Signal

Random
peptide
DNA

phage genome and expressed as a fusion product with
a phage coat protein. It is a very powerful technique
for selecting and engineering polypeptides with novel
functions. The technique was developed first for the
E. coli phage M13 (Parmley & Smith 1988), but has
since been extended to other phages such as T4 and
λ (Ren & Black 1998, Santini et al. 1998).
The M13 phage particle consists of a singlestranded DNA molecule surrounded by a coat consisting of several thousand copies of the major
coat protein, P8. At one end of the particle are five
copies each of the two minor coat proteins P9 and
P7 and at the other end five copies each of P3 and P6.
In early examples of phage display, a random DNA
cassette (see above) was inserted into either the P3
or the P8 gene at the junction between the signal
sequence and the native peptide. E. coli transfected
with the recombinant DNA molecules secreted
phage particles that displayed on their surface the
amino acids encoded by the foreign DNA. Particular
phage displaying peptide motifs with, for example,
antibody-binding properties were isolated by affinity
chromatography (Fig. 8.8). Several rounds of affinity chromatography and phage propagation can be

M13 gene III

Phage
vector
f1ori

Infect male E. coli

Phage
particle

Gene III
protein

DNA

Test binding to antibody
or receptor

Random
protein

Fig. 8.8 The principle
of phage display of
random peptides.

149

Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and protein engineering

used to further enrich for phage with the desired
binding characteristics. In this way, millions of
random peptides have been screened for their ability
to bind to an anti-peptide antibody or to streptavidin
(Cwirla et al. 1990, Devlin et al. 1990, Scott & Smith
1990), and variants of human growth hormone with
improved affinity and receptor specificity have been
isolated (Lowman et al. 1991).
One disadvantage of the original method of phage
display is that polypeptide inserts greater than 10
residues compromise coat-protein function and so
cannot be efficiently displayed. This problem can
be solved by the use of phagemid display (Bass et al.
1990). In this system, the starting-point is a plasmid
carrying a single copy of the P3 or P8 gene from
M13 plus the M13 ori sequence (i.e. a phagemid,
see p. 75). As before, the random DNA sequence is
inserted into the P3 or P8 gene downstream from the
signal peptide-cleavage site and the construct transformed into E. coli. Phage particles displaying the
amino acid sequences encoded by the DNA insert
are obtained by superinfecting the transformed cells
with helper phage. The resulting phage particles
are phenotypically mixed and their surfaces are a
mosaic of normal coat protein and fusion protein.
Specialized phagemid display vectors have been
developed for particular purposes. For example,
phagemids have been constructed that have an amber
(chain-terminating) codon immediately downstream

from the foreign DNA insert and upstream from the
body of P3 or P8. When the recombinant phagemid
is transformed into non-suppressing strains of E. coli,
the protein encoded by the foreign DNA terminates
at the amber codon and is secreted into the medium.
However, if the phagemid is transformed into cells
carrying an amber suppressor, the entire fusion protein is synthesized and displayed on the surface of the
secreted phage particles (Winter et al. 1994). Other
studies ( Jespers et al. 1995, Fuh & Sidhu 2000, Fuh
et al. 2000) have shown that proteins can be displayed as fusions to the carboxy terminus of P3, P6,
and P8. Although amino-terminal display formats are
likely to dominate established applications, carboxyterminal display permits constructs that are unsuited
to amino-terminal display.
For a detailed review of phage and phagemid display, the reader should consult Sidhu (2000) and
Sidhu et al. (2000).
Cell-surface display is a more versatile
alternative to phage display
As noted in the previous section, the size of foreign
protein that can be expressed by phage display is
rather limited. Microbial cell-surface display systems
were developed to solve this problem (for review,
see Lee et al. 2003) and these systems also have far
more applications (Box 8.1). These display systems

Box 8.1 Applications of cell-surface display
There are many different biotechnological and
industrial applications of the cell-surface
display technology (Fig. B8.1). For example,
key proteins from microbial pathogens can
be displayed on the surface of bacteria and
their ability to elicit antigen-specific responses
determined as a major step towards the
development of live vaccines. Proteins
that bind heavy metals or specific organic
pollutants can be expressed on the surface
of cells and these cells can be used as specific
bioadsorbents for environmental remediation.
Alternatively, new enzyme activities can be
expressed on the cell surface to promote
environmental degradation of pollutants or for
use in industrial biocatalysis. Finally, by anchoring
enzymes, receptors, or other signal-sensitive
components to the cell’s surface new biosensors
could be developed. For a review of this topic
the reader should consult Benhar (2001).

Bioadsorbent

Oral vaccines

Antibody
production

Screening of peptide libraries
Cytosol
Mutation detection
Whole-cell
biocatalyst for
bioconversion
Biosensor

Fig. B8.1 Applications of microbial cell-surface
display. Reproduced from Lee et al. (2003), with
permission from Elsevier.

150

CHAPTER 8

involve expressing a heterologous peptide or protein of interest (the passenger or target protein) as
a fusion protein with various cell-surface proteins
(carrier proteins). Depending on the properties of
the passenger and carrier proteins, the passenger
protein is expressed as an N-terminal, a C-terminal
or a sandwich fusion.
For a cell-surface protein to be a successful carrier it should satisfy four requirements. First, it
should have an efficient signal peptide to permit the
fusion protein to pass through the inner membrane.
Second, it should have a strong anchoring structure
to keep fusion proteins on the cell surface without
detachment. Third, it should be compatible with
the passenger protein such that the fusion is not
unstable. Finally, it should be resistant to attack by
proteases present in the periplasmic space or the
growth medium. In Gram-negative bacteria such
as E. coli many different proteins have been subjugated as carriers. Basically, these proteins fall into
two classes: outer membrane proteins (e.g. the adhesin
protein, peptidiglycan-associated lipoprotein, and the
OmpC and TraT proteins) and protein components of
appendages such as pili and flagella. Where outer
membrane proteins are used as the carrier it is important to know which part of them is exposed on the
outer surface of the cell since this needs to be the site
of insertion of the passenger protein.

Table 8.1

The passenger protein to be displayed is selected
by the required application but its properties influence the translocation process and the effectiveness
of the display procedure. For example, the formation
of disulfide bridges at the periplasmic side of the outer
membrane can affect the efficiency of translocation.
Also, the presence of many charged or hydrophobic
residues can result in inefficient secretion. Thus, if
display technology is used to screen variants produced
by random mutagenesis, there may be negative or
positive selection for those mutants that affect the
efficiency of translocation.

Protein engineering
One of the most exciting aspects of recombinant
DNA technology is that it permits the design,
development, and isolation of proteins with improved
operating characteristics and even completely novel
proteins (Table 8.1). The principle of the methods
described so far in this chapter is that the gene is
mutated, either at a discrete site or at random, and
then selection made for a protein variant with the
desired property. The improved variant can be subjected to further rounds of mutagenesis and selection,
a process known as directed evolution. The paradigm
for this approach is the enzyme subtilisin. Every

Some examples of protein engineering.

Example

Method

Reference

Increased rate and extent of biodesulfurization of
diesel by modification of dibenzothiophene
mono-oxygenase

RACHITT

Coco et al. 2001

Generation of a subtilisin with a half-life at 65°C
that is 50 times greater than wild type by recombining
segments from five different subtilisin variants

StEP

Zhao et al. 1998

Conversion of a galactosidase into a fucosidase

Shuffling

Zhang et al. 1997

Enhanced activity of amylosucrase

Random
mutagenesis plus
shuffling

Van der Veen et al. 2004

Generation of novel DNA polymerases from a
combination of rat DNA polymerase beta and
African swine fever virus DNA polymerase X

SCOPE

O’Maille et al. 2002

Generation of novel β-lactamase by recombining
two genes with 40% amino acid identity and 49%
nucleotide sequence identity

SISDC

Hiraga & Arnold 2003

151

Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and protein engineering

property of this serine protease has been altered
including its rate of catalysis, substrate specificity,
pH-rate profile, and stability to oxidative, thermal,
and alkaline inactivation (for review, see Bryan
2000). Variants also have been produced that favor

aminolysis (synthesis) over hydrolysis in aqueous
solvents (see Box 8.2).
An alternative approach to directed evolution is
gene shuffling. The principle of this method is that
many protein variants with desirable characteristics

Box 8.2 Improving enzymes
1985). In a laboratory model of inflammation,
the modified AAT was an effective inhibitor of
elastase and was not inactivated by oxidation.
Clinically, this could be important, since
intravenous replacement therapy with plasma
concentrates of AAT is used with patients with
a genetic deficiency in AAT production.

Oxidation-resistant variants of
a1-antitrypsin (AAT)
Cumulative damage to lung tissue is thought
to be responsible for the development
of emphysema, an irreversible disease
characterized by loss of lung elasticity. The
primary defense against elastase damage is
AAT, a glycosylated serum protein of 394
amino acids. The function of AAT is known
because its genetic deficiency leads to a
premature breakdown of connective tissue.
In healthy individuals there is an association
between AAT and neutrophil elastase followed
by cleavage of AAT between methionine
residue 358 and serine residue 359
(see Fig. B8.2). After cleavage, there is
negligible dissociation of the complex.
Smokers are more prone to emphysema,
because smoking results in an increased
concentration of leucocytes in the lung
and consequently increased exposure to
neutrophil elastase. In addition, leucocytes
liberate oxygen free radicals and these can
oxidize methionine-358 to methionine
sulfoxide. Since methionine sulfoxide is much
bulkier than methionine, it does not fit into
the active site of elastase. Hence oxidized AAT
is a poor inhibitor. By means of site-directed
mutagenesis, an oxidation-resistant mutant
of AAT has been constructed by replacing
methionine-358 with valine (Courtney et al.

Improving the performance of subtilisin
Proof of the power of gene manipulation
coupled with the techniques of in vitro
(random and site-directed) mutagenesis as
a means of generating improved enzymes is
provided by the work done on subtilisin over
the past 15 years (for review, see Bryan 2000).
Every property of this serine protease has been
altered, including its rate of catalysis, substrate
specificity, pH-rate profile, and stability to
oxidative, thermal, and alkaline inactivation. In
the process, well over 50% of the 275 amino
acids of subtilisin have been changed. At some
positions in the molecule, the effects of replacing
the usual amino acid with all the other 19
natural amino acids have been evaluated.
Many of the changes described above were
made to improve the ability of subtilisin to
hydrolyze protein when incorporated into
detergents. However, serine proteases can be
used to synthesize peptides and this approach
has a number of advantages over conventional
methods (Abrahmsen et al. 1991). A problem

Met 358

394

Ser 359

394
Met 358

Fig. B8.2 The cleavage of α1-antitrypsin on
binding to neutrophil elastase.
continued

152

CHAPTER 8

Box 8.2
with the use of subtilisin for peptide synthesis
is that hydrolysis is strongly favored over
aminolysis, unless the reaction is undertaken
in organic solvents. Solvents, in turn, reduce
the half-life of subtilisin. Using site-directed
mutagenesis, a number of variants of subtilisin
have been isolated with greatly enhanced
solvent stability (Wong et al. 1990, Zhong
et al. 1991). Changes introduced included
the minimization of surface changes to reduce
solvation energy, the enhancement of internal
polar and hydrophobic interactions, and the
introduction of conformational restrictions
to reduce the tendency of the protein to
denature. Designing these changes requires
an extensive knowledge of the enzyme’s
structure and function. Chen and Arnold
(1991, 1993) have provided an alternative
solution. They utilized random mutagenesis
combined with screening for enhanced
proteolysis in the presence of solvent
(dimethyl formamide) and substrate
(casein).
The engineering of subtilisin has now gone
one step further, in that it has been modified
already exist in nature and novel combinations of
these variants may have even more desirable properties (Fig. 8.9). There are three sources of variants
for gene shuffling. First, different polymorphisms of
the gene of interest might exist naturally in a single
organism or might have been created by random in
vitro mutagenesis (as described on p. 146). Second,
the same protein with the same activity may be found
in other organisms but the gene and protein sequences
will be different. Third, the protein of interest might
belong to a protein family where the different members have different but related activities.
A good example of gene shuffling is work done
on subtilisin by Ness et al. (1999). They started with
the genes for 26 members of the subtilisin family
and created a library of chimeric proteases. When
this library was screened for four distinct enzyme
properties, variants were found that were significantly improved over any of the parental enzymes for
each individual property. Similarly, Lehmann et al.
(2000) started with a family of mesophilic phytases
whose amino acid sequence had been determined.
Using these data they constructed a “consensus”

continued
such that aminolysis (synthesis) is favored over
hydrolysis, even in aqueous solvents. This was
achieved by changing a serine residue in the
active site to cysteine (Abrahmsen et al. 1991).
The reasons for this enhancement derive
mainly from the increased affinity and
reactivity of the acyl intermediate for the
amino nucleophile (Fig. B8.3). These
engineered “peptide ligases” are in turn
being used to synthesize novel glycopeptides.
A glycosyl amino acid is used in peptide
synthesis to form a glycosyl peptide ester,
which will react with another C-protected
peptide in the presence of the peptide ligase
to form a larger glycosyl peptide.

H 2O

RCOOH + E

OH

Hydrolysis
RCOOR’ + E

OH

RCOO E
R–NH2

Aminolysis
RCOOR’ + E

OH

Fig. B8.3 The aminolysis (synthetic) and hydrolysis
reactions mediated by an acylated protease.

Ancestral species
Evolution
Species 1
Species 2
Species 3
Species 4

DNA shuffling
in vitro

Hybrid genes

Fig. 8.9

Schematic representation of gene shuffling.

Changing genes: site-directed mutagenesis and protein engineering

153

Fragment with DNase

Denature, mix and anneal

Extend DNA

Denature and anneal

Fig. 8.10 The original
method of gene shuffling.
After fragmentation of the
two homologous genes, the
cycles of denaturation,
annealing, and extension are
continued until full-length
genes can be detected by gel
electrophoresis.

phytase sequence and found that an enzyme with
this sequence was much more thermostable than
any of the parent enzymes.
A number of different methods of gene
shuffling have been developed
In the original method of gene shuffling (Stemmer
1993, 2004), one starts by purifying the different
genes that will provide the source of variation.
These genes are digested with DNase to generate the
fragments that will be recombined. The fragments
from the different sources are mixed together and
subjected to repeated rounds of melting, annealing,
and extension (Fig. 8.10). Eventually a full-length
gene should be synthesized and this can be amplified
by the PCR and cloned. The smaller the fragments
that are produced in the initial step the greater the
number of single site variations that can be incorporated in the final product. However, the smaller the
fragments the greater the number of cycles needed
to reassemble a complete gene.

Extend DNA

Repeat until full-length strands generated

An alternative method is the staggered extension
process (StEP, Zhao et al. 1998). This also relies on
repeated cycles of melting, annealing, and extension
to build the variant genes. However, in the StEP process one starts with a mixture of full-length genes,
denatures them, and then primes the synthesis of
complementary strands (Fig. 8.11). After a short
period of primer extension, the DNA is subjected to a
round of melting, annealing, and extension. Some of
the extended primers will anneal to templates with a
different base sequence and on further extension will
generate chimeras. The more cycles of extension,
melting, and annealing the greater the variability
that can be produced.
RACHITT (random chimeragenesis on transient
templates) is conceptually similar to the original
DNA-shuffling method but is designed to produce
chimeras with a much larger number of crossovers
(Coco et al. 2001, Coco 2003). In this method the
gene fragments are generated from one strand of
all but one of the parental DNAs (Fig. 8.12). These
fragments then are reassembled on the full-length

154

CHAPTER 8

to a greater or lesser extent on the annealing of
mismatched DNA sequences. Thus there is always a
chance that the parental molecules will be recreated
preferentially or that the degree of variation generated will not be as great as expected. However,
methods for “forcing” the generation of recombinants
have been developed (for review, see Neylon 2004).

Denature and
anneal primer

Primer

Chimeric proteins can be produced in the
absence of gene homology

DNA extension
for short period

Denature and
anneal

or

or

DNA extension
for short period

Multiple cycles of
DNA extension for short
period, denaturation
and annealing

Fig. 8.11 The StEP method for generating hybrid proteins.
In the example shown, a hybrid gene will be constructed from
two homologous genes (shown in purple and black). Cloning
of the hybrid gene will result in the production of a hybrid
protein. For clarity, only one strand of each gene is shown
after the initial denaturation step.

opposite strand of the remaining parent (the transient
template). The fragments are cut back to remove
mismatched sections, extended, and then ligated to
generate full-length genes. Finally, the template strand
is destroyed to leave only the ligated gene fragments
to be converted to double-stranded DNA.
Each of the methods described above has its
advantages and disadvantages and all of them rely

The gene-shuffling methods described above have
an absolute requirement for significant homology
between the parental sequences. However, there may
be a wish to create hybrids between proteins with
functional similarities but whose sequence homology
is less than 50%. Achieving this requires methods for
combining non-homologous sequences and the first
one to be developed (Ostermeier et al. 1999) was
ITCHY (incremental truncation for the creation of
hybrid enzymes). This method is based on the direct
ligation of libraries of fragments generated by the
truncation of two template sequences, each template
being truncated from opposite ends (Fig. 8.13). This
ligation procedure removes any need for homology
at the point of crossover but the downside is that the
DNA fragments may be reconnected in a way that
is not at all analogous to their position in the template gene.
In the original ITCHY process the incremental
truncation was performed using timed exonuclease
digestions. In practice, these digestions are difficult
to control. An improved process was developed where
the initial templates are generated with phosphorothioate linkages incorporated at random along
the length of the gene (Lutz et al. 2001a). Complete
exonuclease digestion then generates fragments with
lengths determined by the position of the nucleaseresistant phosphorothioate linkage. This method is
known as thio-ITCHY and is much simpler to perform.
One drawback of ITCHY libraries is that they contain
only one crossover per gene. However, by combining ITCHY libraries with DNA-shuffling methods,
a process known as SCRATCHY, it is possible to
generate additional variation (Lutz et al. 2001b).
A major problem with methods such as ITCHY is
that they generate large numbers of non-functional
sequences due to mutations, insertions, and deletions. Furthermore, when one examines the threedimensional structure of proteins it is clear that they
are organized into domains and motifs. Therefore,
a more attractive way of generating chimeric

Single
strands
from
homologous
genes

Synthesize
complementary
strand with dUTP
instead of dTTP

DNase

Uracil

Mix and anneal

Exonuclease
+ DNA polymerase
+ DNA ligase

Endonuclease V

Convert to double strands

Fig. 8.12

The RACHITT method for creating hybrid proteins.

156

CHAPTER 8

e1

Ge

ne
2

Ge
n

Endonuclease
cleavage site

Endonuclease
cleavage

Exonuclease III
digestion

proteins might be to recombine these domains
and motifs in novel ways. Two general methods of
doing this have been developed (O’Maille et al.
2002, Hiraga & Arnold 2003) and these are SCOPE
(structure-based combinatorial protein engineering)
and SISDC (sequence-independent site-directed
chimeragenesis).

Suggested reading
Brannigan J.A. & Wilkinson A.J. (2002) Protein
engineering 20 years on. Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology 3, 964–70.
A short but excellent review of the development and pharmaceutical applications of protein engineering.
Collins C.H., Yokobayashi Y., Umeno D. & Arnold F.H.
(2003) Engineering proteins that bind, move, make
and break DNA. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 14,
371–8.
Another short but excellent review that focuses on what
can be achieved with protein engineering rather than on the
methods themselves.

Digestion with
mung bean
nucelase

Ligation

Fig. 8.13 The ITCHY method for creating hybrids of two
related proteins. In the figure, the two related proteins are
encoded by genes 1 (shown in purple) and 2 (shown in gray).
The end result is a hybrid gene comprising the 5′ end of gene 1
and the 3′ end of gene 2.

Link A.J., Mock M.L. & Tirrell D.A. (2003) Non-canonical
amino acids in protein engineering. Current Opinion
in Biotechnology 14, 603–9.
Lu Y. (2005) Design and engineering of metalloproteins containing unnatural amino acids as nonnative metal-containing cofactors. Current Opinion in
Chemical Biology 9, 118–26.
These two papers provide short reviews of the novel
chemistries that are possible once unusual amino acids are
introduced to proteins.
Lutz S. & Patrick W.M. (2004) Novel methods for
directed evolution of enzymes: quality not quantity.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 15, 291–7.
Neylon C. (2004) Chemical and biochemical strategies
for the randomisation of protein encoding DNA
sequences: library construction methods for directed
evolution. Nucleic Acids Research 32, 1448–59.
Each of the methods for generating gene libraries is reviewed
in these papers with particular attention being given to the
practicality of the methods and the characteristics of the
libraries that are produced.
Roodveldt C., Aharoni A. & Tawfik D.S. (2005) Directed
evolution of proteins for heterologous expression
and stability. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 15,
50–6.
A short review of the application of protein engineering for
overproduction of commercial proteins.

CHAPTER 9
Bioinformatics

Introduction
Bioinformatics is the branch of biology that deals with
the storage, analysis, and interpretation of experimental data. In today’s climate of large-scale biology, the datasets can be very large and computers
are essential. The instruments of bioinformatics are
computers, databases, and the statistical tools and
algorithms that are used for data analysis. The purpose of bioinformatics is to extract information and
identify relationships between datasets. The datasets
often comprise nucleotide or protein sequences, protein structures, gene-expression profiles, molecular
weights, digitized images of gels, and biochemical or
metabolic pathways.
Bioinformatics as a defined scientific discipline
emerged in the mid-1990s as the genomic revolution
geared up and the amount of sequence, structural,
and biochemical data began to accumulate. However, the roots of bioinformatics can be traced back
to the 1960s, when Margaret Dayhoff established
the first database of protein sequences, a database
that was published annually as a series of volumes
entitled Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure (Dayhoff
et al. 1965). It could therefore be argued that bioinformatics was born when the first complete protein
sequence was determined. This was bovine insulin,
sequenced between 1951 and 1955 by Frederick
Sanger and colleagues (Ryle et al. 1955). By 1965,
when the Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure was
first published, there were more than 100 protein
sequences in the scientific literature. However, the
Atlas contained very few uncharacterized proteins;
most of the sequences were redundant and were used
to investigate sequence diversity between homologous proteins in large families such as the globins. It
was at this time that the foundations of bioinformatics
were laid with the development of mathematical tools
for sequence comparison.
It is now much easier to obtain a DNA sequence
than a protein sequence, but before 1977, when

reliable methods for DNA sequencing became available, this was not the case. The first nucleotide
sequence to be determined was that of a yeast tRNA
(Madison et al. 1966), and most reported nucleotide
sequences prior to about 1975 were from RNA molecules. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, DNA
sequences began to accumulate slowly in the literature and it became more common to predict protein sequences by translating sequenced genes than
by direct analysis of the proteins themselves. Thus
the number of uncharacterized protein sequences
began to increase. In 1982 there were enough DNA
sequences to justify the establishment of the first
nucleotide sequence database, GenBank (Benson
et al. 2004). By the end of 1982, GenBank contained
a grand total of 606 sequences. The database grew
steadily until about 1994, when the genomics era
really kicked in, and then the number of sequences
began to grow exponentially as large numbers of
genomic clones and expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
were deposited. In 1994 the number of sequences
in GenBank was just over 200,000. Ten years later,
the figure stands at 30 million and shows no sign of
slowing down (Fig. 9.1).
As the number of sequences has grown, so has
the necessity to use computer-based algorithms to
analyze them. In this chapter, we focus on the use
of algorithms for the analysis and interpretation of
sequence data, and the development and implementation of databases that permit efficient access
and management of different types of information. A
detailed analysis of the algorithms and statistics used
in bioinformatics is beyond the scope of this book,
and the interested reader should consult a specialist
text such as Attwood & Parry-Smith (1999). Later
in the book, we consider how bioinformatics is used
to assist with the analysis, modeling, and prediction of protein structures and interactions, and
how bioinformatics forms an essential component of
genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics.

158

CHAPTER 9

28

28000

26

26000

24

24000
Base pairs
Sequences

22000

20

20000

18

18000

16

16000

14

14000

12

12000

10

10000

8

8000

6

6000

4

4000

2

2000

0
1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

Base pairs of DNA (milions)

Sequences (millions)

22

0
2002

Year

Fig. 9.1 Growth of the GenBank sequence database from
1982–2002. Reproduced with kind permission from
GenBank.

Databases are required to store and
cross-reference large biological datasets
Databases are at the heart of bioinformatics. Essentially, they are electronic filing cabinets that offer
a convenient and efficient method of storing vast
amounts of information. There are many different
database types, depending both on the nature of the
information being stored (e.g. sequences, structures,
gel images) and on the manner of data storage (e.g.
flat files, tables in relational databases, object-oriented
databases). The number of different databases is growing very rapidly. During the year 2005, 171 new
molecular biology databases were added to the collection listed by the journal Nucleic Acids Research,
bringing the total to 719 (Galperin et al. 2005). An
electronic version of the database list is available at
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/.
The primary nucleotide sequence databases
are repositories for annotated nucleotide
sequence data
Perhaps the most important databases in molecular
biology are the three so-called primary sequence
databases. These are GenBank, maintained by the
US National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI); the DNA Databank of Japan (DDBJ); and the
Nucleotide Sequence Database maintained by the

European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL). New
sequence data can be deposited with any one of these
three groups since they automatically share the data
on a daily basis. Further data is collected into the
databases by automatically scanning the scientific
literature.
The primary sequence databases are repositories
for raw sequence data derived directly from experiments and sequencing projects, but the entries are
extensively annotated. A typical DNA sequence
record held by EMBL is shown in Fig. 9.2. The lefthand column is a list of headings and data is entered
in the right-hand column. The file contains not
only the sequence, but also information on literature
references, and a features table which shows start
and stop sites and, if appropriate, the predicted protein sequence. The main sequence databases have
subsidiaries with specific types of sequence data in
them. For example, GenBank has a subsidiary called
dbEST, which is a database of ESTs (see Box 9.1).
ESTs have been instrumental in generating gene
maps both by hands-on experimentation and pure in
silico analysis. For example, the first-generation
human gene map was generated by mapping ESTs
onto radiation hybrid panels and YAC clones using
PCR assays. Now genomic sequences are compared
directly to the contents of dbEST in order to identify
potential open reading frames (ORFs).
SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL are databases of
annotated protein sequences
The SWISS-PROT database is not just a repository for protein sequences. Rather, it is a collection
of confirmed protein sequences that is extensively
annotated with information about structure and
biological function, protein family assignments, and
bibliographic references (Fig. 9.3). The quality of the
data in SWISS-PROT is very high because the content is actively managed (curated). Since verification
and complete annotation are time consuming, the
content of SWISS-PROT is always slightly out of date.
Therefore, the less robust TrEMBL database has
been developed consisting of entries in the same
format as those in SWISS-PROT, derived from the
translation of all coding sequences in the EMBL
nucleotide sequence database that are not in
SWISS-PROT already. Unlike SWISS-PROT entries,
those in TrEMBL are awaiting manual annotation.
However, they are given a potential functional
annotation by similarity to homologous proteins in
SWISS-PROT.

Bioinformatics

EMBL (Release):RC22378
ID RC22378 standard; RNA; PLN; 1440 BP.
XX
AC U22378;
XX
SV U22378.1
XX
DT 11-APR-1995 (Rel. 43, Created)
DT 04-MAR-2000 (Rel. 63, Last updated, Version 5)
XX
DE Ricinus communis oleate 12-hydroxylase mRNA, complete cds.
XX
KW .
XX
OS Ricinus communis (castor bean)
OC Eukaryota; Viridiplantae; Streptophyta; Embryophyta; Tracheophyta;
OC Spermatophyta; Magnoliophyta; eudicotyledons; core eudicots; Rosidae;
OC eurosids I; Malpighiales; Euphorbiaceae; Ricinus.
XX
RN [1]
RP 1-1440
RX MEDLINE; 95350145.
RA van de Loo F.J., Broun P., Turner S., Somerville C.;
RT “An oleate 12-hydroxylase from Ricinus communis L. is a fatty acyl
RT desaturase homolog”;
RL Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92(15):6743-6747(1995).
XX
RN [2]
RP 1-1440
RA Somerville C.R.;
RT ;
RL Submitted (08-MAR-1995) to the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ databases.
RL Chris R. Somerville, Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 290
RL Panama Street, Stanford, CA 94305-4101, USA
XX
DR AGDR; U22378; U22378.
DR MENDEL; 10454; Ricco;1207;10454.
DR SPTREMBL; Q41131; Q41131.
XX
FH Key
Location/Qualifiers
FH
1..1440
FT source
FT
/db_xref=“taxon:3988”
FT
/organism=“Ricinus communis”
FT
/strain=“Baker 296”
FT
/tissue_type=“developing endosperm”
187..1350
FT CDS
FT
/codon_start=1
FT
/db_xref=“SPTREMBL:Q41131”
FT
/note=“expressed only in developing endosperm of castor;
FT
possible integral membrane protein of endoplasmic
FT
reticulum; uses cytochrome b5 as intermediate electron
FT
donor; fatty acid hydroxylase”
FT
/product=“oleate 12-hydroxylase”
FT
/protein_id=“AAC49010.1”
FT
/translation=“MGGGGRMSTVITSNNSEKKGGSSHLKRAPHTKPPFTLGDLKRAIP
FT
PHCFERSFVRSFSYVAYDVCLSFLFYSIATNFFPYISSPLSYVAWLVYWLFQGCILTGL
.
.
.
FT
KPIMGEYYRYDGTPFYKALWREAKECLFVEPDEGAPTQGVFWYRNKY”
FT polyA site 1440
FT
/note=“8 A nucleotides”
XX
SQ Sequence 1440 BP; 367 A; 340 C; 321 G; 412 T; 0 other;
gccaccttaa gcgagcgccg cacacgaagc ctcctttcac acttggtgac ctcaaatcaa
60
acaccacacc ttataactta gtcttaagag agagagagag agagaggaga catttctctt
120
.
.
.
ggcgttttct ggtaccggaa caagtattaa aaaagtgtca tgtagcctgt ttctttaaga
1380
gaagtaatta gaacaagaag gaatgtgtgt gtagtgtaat gtgttctaat aaagaaggca
1440
//

Fig. 9.2 A typical DNA sequence database entry (dotted lines denote points at which, for convenience, material has been
excised).

159

160

CHAPTER 9

Box 9.1 Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) provide
a rich resource for bioinformatics
The gold standard in the analysis of individual
genes is a full-length cDNA clone that has
been independently sequenced several times
to ensure accuracy. Such clones are desirable
for accurate archiving and for the detailed
mapping of genomic transcription units,
i.e. to determine the transcriptional start and
stop sites, and all intron/exon boundaries.
However, as discussed in Chapter 6, such
clones can be difficult and expensive to
obtain. Technology has not yet advanced to
the stage where full-length cDNAs can be
produced and sequenced in a highthroughput manner.
Fortunately, full-length cDNA clones are
not required for many types of analysis. Even
short cDNA sequence fragments can be used
to identify specific genes unambiguously,
and therefore map them onto physical gene
maps or provide information about their
expression patterns. The development of
high-throughput sequencing technology has
allowed thousands of clones to be picked
randomly from cDNA libraries and subjected
to single-pass sequencing to generate 2–300bp cDNA signatures called expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) (Wilcox et al. 1991, Okubo et al.
1992). Although short and somewhat
inaccurate, very large numbers of sequences
can be collected rapidly and inexpensively,
and deposited into public databases that can

The Protein Databank is the main repository
for protein structural information
While SWISS-PROT is the major database of protein
sequences, three-dimensional structures are stored
in the Protein Databank (PDB). This is the single
world-wide archive of structural data derived by
X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, and other techniques, as well as structural models (Chapter 22). The database is maintained by the Research Collaboratory for Structural
Bioinformatics (RCSB), at Rutgers University. The
associated Nucleic Acid Databank (NDB) which
shows three-dimensional structures of nucleic acids
(e.g. tRNAs) is also maintained there. Like SWISS-

be searched using the Internet. The vast
majority of database sequences are now ESTs
rather than full cDNA or genomic clones.
ESTs have been used for gene discovery, as
physical markers on genomic maps, and for
the identification of genes in genomic clones
(e.g. Adams et al. 1991, 1992, Banfi et al.
1996). Nearly 30 million ESTs from numerous
species are currently searchable using the
major public EST database, dbEST. The
development of EST informatics has been
reviewed (Boguski 1995, Gerhold & Caskey
1996, Hard 1996, Okubo & Matsubara 1997).
As well as their use for mapping, ESTs
are also useful for expression analysis. PCR
primers designed around ESTs have been
used to generate large numbers of target
sequences for cDNA microarrays. (see
Chapter 20), and the partial cDNA fragments
used for techniques such as differential display
PCR are also essentially ESTs (Chapter 6).
The ultimate EST approach to expression
analysis is serial analysis of gene expression
(SAGE). In this technique, the size of the
sequence tag is only 9–10 bp (the minimum
that is sufficient to identify specific transcripts
uniquely) and multiple tags are ligated into
a large concatemer allowing expressed genes
to be “read” by cloning and sequencing
the tags serially arranged in each clone
(Chapter 20).

PROT, data in the PDB are very high quality and are
extensively curated. There are also other structural
databases such as the NCBI’s Molecular Modeling
Database (MMDB) which aims to provide information on sequence and structure neighbors, links
between the scientific literature and 3D structures,
and sequence and structure visualization.
Secondary sequence databases pull out
common features of protein sequences
and structures
Secondary sequence databases take data from the
primary databases and use them to classify genes and
proteins into different families using the techniques

SWALL:PAGT HUMAN
ID PAGT
HUMAN
STANDARD;
PRT;
559 AA.
AC Q10472;
DT 01-OCT-1996 (Rel. 34, Created)
DT 01-OCT-1996 (Rel. 34, Last sequence update)
DT 01-MAR-2002 (Rel. 41, Last annotation update)
DE Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.41) (ProteinDE UDP acetylgalactosaminyltransferase) (UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide, NDE acetylgalactosaminyltransferase) (GalNAc-T1).
GN GALNT1.
OS Homo sapiens (Human).
OC Eukaryota; Metazoa; Chordata; Craniata; Vertebrata; Euteleostomi;
OC Mammalia; Eutheria; Primates; Catarrhini; Hominidae; Homo.
OX NCBI_TaxID=9606;
RN [1]
RP SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
RC TISSUE=Salivary gland;
RX MEDLINE=96115928; PubMed=8690719;
RA Meurer J.A., Naylor J.M., Baker C.A., Thomsen D.R., Homa F.L.,
RA Elhammer A.P.;
RT “cDNA cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization of a human
RT UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide, N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase.”;
RL J. Biochem. 118:568-574(1995).
RN [2]
RP SEQUENCE FROM N.A.
RX MEDLINE=96025800; PubMed=7592619;
RA White T., Bennett E.P., Takio K., Soerensen T., Bonding N.,
RA Clausen H.;
RT “Purification and cDNA cloning of a human UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-DRT galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase.”;
RL J. Biol. Chem. 270:24156-24165(1995).
CC -!- FUNCTION: THIS PROTEIN CATALYZES THE INITIAL REACTION IN O-LINKED
CC
OLIGOSACCHARIDE BIOSYNTHESIS, THE TRANSFER OF AN N-ACETYL-DCC
GALACTOSAMINE RESIDUE TO A SERINE OR THREONINE RESIDUE ON THE
CC
PROTEIN RECEPTOR.
CC -!- CATALYTIC ACTIVITY: UDP-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine + polypeptide =
CC
UDP + N-acetyl-D-galactosaminyl-polypeptide.
CC -!- COFACTOR: MANGANESE AND CALCIUM.
CC -!- PATHWAY: GLYCOSYLATION.
CC -!- SUBCELLULAR LOCATION: Type II membrane protein. Golgi.
CC -!- SIMILARITY: BELONGS TO THE GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE FAMILY 2.
CC -!- SIMILARITY: CONTAINS 1 RICIN B-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN.
CC --------------------------------------------------------------------------CC This SWISS-PROT entry is copyright. It is produced through a collaboration
CC between the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics and the EMBL outstation CC the European Bioinformatics Institute. There are no restrictions on its
CC use by non-profit institutions as long as its content is in no way
CC modified and this statement is not removed. Usage by and for commercial
CC entities requires a license agreement (See http://www.isb-sib.ch/announce/
CC or send an email to license@isb-sib.ch).
CC --------------------------------------------------------------------------DR EMBL; U41514; AAC50327.1; -.
DR EMBL; X85018; CAA59380.1; -.
DR MIM; 602273; -.
DR InterPro; IPR001173; Glycos_transf_2.
DR InterPro; IPR000772; Ricin_B_lectin.
DR Pfam; PF00535; Glycos_transf_2; 1.
DR Pfam; PF00652; Ricin_B_lectin; 3.
DR SMART; SM00458; RICIN; 1.
DR PROSITE; PS50231; RICIN_B_LECTIN; 1.
KW Transferase; Glycosyltransferase; Transmembrane; Signal-anchor;
KW Golgi stack; Glycoprotein; Manganese; Calcium; Lectin.
FT PROPEP
1
40
REMOVED IN SOLUBLE POLYPEPTIDE
FT
N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE
FT
(BY SIMILARITY).
FT CHAIN
41
559
POLYPEPTIDE NFT
ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE, SOLUBLE
FT
FORM.
FT DOMAIN
1
8
CYTOPLASMIC (POTENTIAL).
FT TRANSMEM
9
28
SIGNAL-ANCHOR (TYPE-II MEMBRANE PROTEIN)
FT
(POTENTIAL).
FT DOMAIN
29
559
LUMENAL, CATALYTIC (POTENTIAL).
FT DOMAIN
439
559
RICIN B-TYPE LECTIN.
FT CARBOHYD
95
95
N-LINKED (GLCNAC . . .) (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
117
117
O-LINKED (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
118
118
O-LINKED (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
119
119
O-LINKED (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
141
141
N-LINKED (GLCNAC . . .) (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
288
288
O-LINKED (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
541
541
N-LINKED (GLCNAC . . .) (POTENTIAL).
FT CARBOHYD
552
552
N-LINKED (GLCNAC . . .) (POTENTIAL).
SQ SEQUENCE
559 AA;
64219 MW;
CD68118CB201EE5B
CRC64;
MRKFAYCKVV LATSLIWVLL DMFLLLYFSE CNKCDEKKER GLPAGDVLEP VQKPHEGPGE
.
.
.
LCLDVSKLNG PVTMLKCHHL KGNQLWEYDP VKLTLQHVNS NQCLDKATEE DSQVPSIRDC
NGSRSQQWLL RNVTLPEIF
//

Fig. 9.3 An abbreviated version of a typical entry in the SWISS-PROT database (dotted lines denote points at which, for
convenience, material has been excised).

162

Table 9.1

CHAPTER 9

A selection of widely used secondary sequence and structural databases.

Database

Contents

URL

PROSITE

Sequence patterns associated with
protein families and longer sequence
profiles representing full protein
domains

http://ca.expasy.org/prosite

PRINTS,
BLOCKS

Highly conserved regions in multiple
alignments of protein families. These
are called motifs in PRINTS and blocks
in BLOCKS

http://bioinf.man.ac.uk/dbbrowser/PRINTS
http://www.blocks.fhcrc.org

Pfam, SMART,
ProDom

Collections of protein domains

http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam
http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/
http://prodes.toulouse.inra.fr/prodom/current/
html/home.php

Superfamily

HMM library and genome
assignments

http://supfam.org/SUPERFAMILY/

PROT-FAM

Protein sequence homology database

http://www.mips.biochem.mpg.de/desc/protfam/

ProClass and
iProclass

Protein classifications based on
PROSITE patterns and PIR
superfamilies

http://pir.georgetown.edu/iproclass/
http://pir.georgetown.edu/gfserver/proclass.html

ProtoMap

Automatic hierarchical classification
of all SWISS-PROT and TrEMBL
sequences

http://protomap.cornell.edu/

SYSTERS

Protein families database

http://systers.molgen.mpg.de/

CATH

Hierarchical classification of protein
structures

http://www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/cath_new/

DDD

Structural classification of recurring
protein domains

http://www2.ebi.ac.uk/dali/domain

FSSP

Fold classification based on structural
alignments

http://www.embl.ebi.ac.uk/dali/fssp

SCOP

Manually curated structural
classification of proteins

http://scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop

Interpro

A search facility that integrates the
information from other secondary
databases

http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/

of pattern matching. Similarly, there are various
structural databases which classify proteins into
families based on the possession of particular structural motifs. These databases work by extracting
information from the primary databases and using
algorithms sometimes with additional manual
curation in an attempt to classify sequences and
structures into different families. As more sequence
and structural data accumulate, such classification
becomes more refined, and it becomes easier to

assign functions to newly discovered genes and proteins based on sequence or structural similarity to
known genes and proteins. Some of the more widely
used secondary databases are listed in Table 9.1.
The entries in these databases are extensively crossreferences with GenBank, SWISS-PROT, the PDB, and
additional databases dealing with functional classifications and biochemical pathways (see below).
The secondary databases have been constructed
using different analytical methods such as motif

Bioinformatics

163

Fig. 9.4 InterPro analysis of
human prothrombin. The bars
represent matches to different
pattern, profile, and structure
databases listed in the key.

recognition, fingerprints of collections of motifs,
domain profiles, and hidden Markov models. Consequently, each has different strengths and weaknesses
and hence different areas of optimum application.
This makes it difficult to interpret the results when a
predicted protein hits entries in several of the
databases. To resolve this issue, a cross-referencing
system called InterPro has been developed (Apweiler
et al. 2001a,b). InterPro permits a protein sequence
to be screened against each of the secondary
databases and then extracts all the relevant information (Fig. 9.4). An example of the use of InterPro can
be found in the analysis of the proteome of Drosophila
(Rubin et al. 2000). We discuss the role of structural
databases further in Chapter 22.
Other databases cover a variety of
useful topics
A whole book would be required to describe all the
databases and their salient features available to
biology researchers. However, there are a number of
integrated data-retrieval tools which can be accessed
over the Internet, and these can be used to search
many databases at once. Perhaps the best known is
Entrez, a data-retrieval tool developed by the NCBI,
which links together all the NCBI databases including GenBank and MMDB as well as the literature
database MEDLINE and OMIM (on-line Mendelian
inheritance in man), a database of gene products
and human phenotypes. Similar tools include SRS

(sequence retrieval system) and DBGet (Kaneisha
1998, Lewitter 1998).
The more notable types of database available
on the Internet include those dedicated to specific
organisms or genome-sequencing projects, and databases for displaying genome-sequence data complete
with gene annotations. There are several so-called
gateway sites that contain compendiums of such
databases, and these provide a useful first port of
call for the uninitiated. Some examples are listed
in Table 9.2. The more recently established databases deal with protein functions and attempt to
link all proteins into functional networks. Some
of these databases focus on specific product types
(e.g. receptors, transcription factors) while others
have a more general remit. A good example of the
latter is the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/), which integrates
molecular pathways with gene and protein functions
and metabolism. Databases such as DIP and BIND
focus on cataloging protein–protein and protein–
small molecule interactions, as discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 23.

Sequence analysis is based on
alignment scores
The basis of sequence comparison is the ability to
align two sequences and determine the number of
shared residues. The result is an alignment score,

164

CHAPTER 9

Table 9.2 A selection of gateway sites for bioinformatics on the Internet.

URL

Description

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Homepage,
linking to many useful databases, bioinformatics tools, and
applications. Home of Entrez, PubMed, GenBank, UniGene,
Genome databases and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man

http://www.ebi.ac.uk

The European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) is a non-profit academic
organization that forms part of the European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL). Another good starting point to find biological
databases and bioinformatics software, with good tutorial support

http://www.expasy.ch

The ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) proteomics server of
the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB). Provides links to many
resources, databases and bioinformatics tools relating to the
analysis of proteins

http://www.ornl.gov/sci/
techresources/Human_Genome/
links.shtml

Human Genome Project information “links to the genetic world”
hosted by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, a massive collection of
links to all manner of useful sites

http://www.highveld.com/pages/
molbiol.html

Molecular Biology Jumpstation. Another very extensive and useful
collection of links to molecular biology websites. An excellent place
to start looking for information

http://wit.integratedgenomics.com/
GOLD/

Genomes On Line Database, with links to genomic databases and
progress reports on genome projects

http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/

Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. A very comprehensive
Japanese site including metabolic maps

http://bioinformatics.ubc.ca/resources/
links_directory/

An impressively comprehensive site maintained by Nucleic Acids
Research and the UBC Bioinformatics Centre at the University of
British Columbia (UBC) listing freely available tools, databases, and
resources for bioinformatics research organized within categories
familiar to biologists.

which represents the quality of the alignment and,
at the same time, the closeness of the evolutionary
relationship between the two sequences. For nucleotide sequences, comparisons are always made on the
basis of sequence identity, which is the percentage
of identical residues in the alignment. For protein
sequences, identity can be suitable for the comparison of very closely related sequences but a more
useful measure is sequence similarity, which takes
into account conservative substitutions between
chemically or physically similar amino acids (e.g.
valine and isoleucine). When evolutionary changes
occur in protein sequences, they tend to involve
substitutions between amino acids with similar properties because such changes are less likely to affect
the structure and function of the protein. Tables
known as substitution score matrices are used to

assign weightings or probabilities to particular substitutions. Several of these matrices are in common
use, such as the PAM250 matrix and the BLOSUM80
matrix. The weightings have been derived by looking at the type of substitutions that have occurred
over an evolutionary time scale.
Algorithms for pairwise similarity searching
find the best alignment between pairs of
sequences
Very short nucleotide or protein sequences can
be compared manually, but computer algorithms
are required to find the best alignments when the
sequences are longer than about 10–15 residues.
There are two algorithms in common use, known
as the Needleman–Wunsch and Smith–Waterman

165

Bioinformatics

algorithms, and both of them use dynamic programming to achieve the best alignment scores.
Although the algorithms work on similar principles, the Needleman–Wunsch algorithm looks for
global similarity between sequences while the Smith–
Waterman algorithm focuses on shorter regions
of local similarity. Gap penalties are usually applied
so that indiscriminate sequence gaps cannot be
introduced into the alignment to force sequences to
match. Usually, an affine gap penalty is employed,
where the alignment score suffers a penalty when
a gap is opened, and a smaller penalty when an
existing gap is extended.
Dynamic programming algorithms are guaranteed
to find the best alignment between two sequences for
a given substitution matrix and gap penalty system
but they are slow and resource hungry. Therefore,
if they are applied to large sequence databases,
the searches could take many hours to perform. To
allow more rapid searches, alternative methods have
been developed which are not based on dynamic programming, and which are faster but less accurate.
These have been important in the development
of Internet-based database search facilities which
otherwise could be rapidly saturated by researchers
carrying out similarity searches. The two principal
algorithms are BLAST and FASTA. There are several
variants of each algorithm that are adapted for different types of searches depending on the nature of the
query sequence and the database (Table 9.3). Both
BLAST and FASTA take into account the fact that
high-scoring alignments are likely to contain short

Table 9.3 Variants of
the BLAST and FASTA
algorithms.

Program

stretches of identical or near identical letters, which
are sometimes termed words. In the case of BLAST,
the first step is to look for words of a certain fixed
word length (W, which is usually equivalent to three
amino acids) that score above a given threshold
level, T, set by the user. In FASTA, this word length is
two amino acids and there is no T value because the
match must be perfect. Both programs then attempt
to extend their matching segments to produce longer
alignments, which in BLAST terminology are called
high-scoring segment pairs. FASTA is slower than
BLAST because the final stage of the alignment process involves alignment of the high-scoring regions
using full dynamic programming.
The significance of a sequence-identity or sequencesimilarity score depends on the length of the
sequence over which the alignment takes place.
The difference between chance similarity and alignments that have real biological significance is determined by the statistical analysis of search scores,
particularly the calculation of p values and E values.
The p value of a similarity score S is the probability
that a score of at least S would have been obtained in
a match between any two unrelated protein sequences
of similar composition and length. Significant matches
are therefore identified by low p values (e.g. p = 0.01),
which indicate that it is very unlikely that the similarity score was obtained by chance, and probably
indicates a real evolutionary relationship. The E
value is related to p and is the expected frequency of
similarity scores of at least S that would occur by
chance. E increases in proportion to the size of the

Compares

FASTA

A nucleotide sequence against a nucleotide sequence
database, or an amino acid sequence against a protein
sequence database

TFASTA

An amino acid sequence against a nucleotide sequence
database translated in all six reading frames

BLASTN

A nucleotide sequence against a nucleotide sequence database

BLASTX

A nucleotide sequence translated in all six reading frames
against a protein sequence database

EST BLAST

A cDNA/EST sequence against cDNA/EST sequence databases

BLASTP

An amino acid sequence against a protein sequence database

TBLASTN

An amino acid sequence against a nucleotide sequence
database translated in all six reading frames

166

CHAPTER 9

database that is searched, so even searches with
low p values (e.g. p = 0.0001) might uncover some
spurious matches in a database containing 100,000
sequences (E = 0.001 × 100,000 = 100).
Multiple alignments allow important features
of gene and protein families to be identified
While pairwise alignments can be used to search for
related proteins and provide identification and an
initial classification of a newly determined protein
sequence, the inter-relationships between members
of a protein family are better illustrated by multiple alignments. This is because the conservation of
any two amino acid residues between two protein
sequences could occur by chance, but if that same
residue is found in five or 10 proteins in the family it
may play a key functional role.
There are several software packages that can be
used for multiple sequence alignment, perhaps the
most commonly used of which is ClustalW/X. These
programs use progressive alignment strategies in
which pairwise alignments are carried out first to
assess the degree of similarity between each sequence
and to produce a dendrogram of these relationships,
which is similar to a phylogenetic tree. The two most
similar sequences are aligned first and the others
are added in order of similarity. The advantage of
this method is its speed, but a disadvantage is that
information in distant sequence alignments that
could improve the overall alignment is lost. In many
cases, the multiple alignments have to be adjusted
manually, e.g. to bring conserved cysteine residues
into register when it is known that such residues
are involved in disulfide bonds.

Sequence analysis of genomic DNA involves
the de novo identification of genes and
other features
When a long piece of DNA has been sequenced, the
first task is to identify any genes that are present.
In prokaryotes, gene density is generally high and
most protein-coding genes lack introns, so the task
is relatively straightforward. However, if the DNA
in question came from a higher eukaryote a gene is
much harder to recognize because it may be divided
into many small exons and a similar number of
larger introns. For example, in the human genome a
typical exon is 150 bp and a typical intron is several
kilobases so a complete gene can be hundreds of

kilobases in length. Also, the mRNA from some genes
can be edited in a number of different ways, resulting
in the generation of splice variants. That is, different
polypeptides are synthesized from a single gene. An
added problem in gene finding is the signal-to-noise
ratio. In bacterial genomes, genes make up 80–85%
of the DNA. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae this
figure drops to 70%. In the fruit fly and nematode
this figure drops to 25% and in the human genome
genes account for only 3% of the DNA. Thus, defining the precise start and stop positions of a gene and
the splicing pattern of its exons among all the noncoding sequence is exceedingly difficult.
Once a gene has been identified the nucleic acid
sequence is converted into a protein sequence. The
question then is, what is the function of this protein?
By searching all the information contained in the
various databases it may be possible to identify
other proteins with a similar sequence and this may
help to identify its function. Sequence comparisons
also can be used to identify particular motifs in a
protein such as ATP-binding or DNA-binding structures and these too can give information about
function.
Genes in prokaryotic DNA can often be found
by six-frame translation
If one starts with a length of DNA sequence and
wants to identify possible genes then the first task
is to identify the correct reading frame. Since there
are three possible reading frames on each strand of
a DNA molecule this is done by carrying out a
six-frame translation. The result is six potential protein sequences (Fig. 9.5). The correct reading frame
is assumed to be the longest frame uninterrupted
by a stop codon (TGA, TAA, or TAG). The longer
this open reading frame (ORF), the more likely it is
to be a gene since long ORFs are unlikely to occur by
chance. Finding the end of such an ORF is easier than
finding its beginning. The N-terminal amino acid of
a protein usually is methionine so the presence of
an ATG codon might indicate the 5′ end of a gene.
However, methionine is not always the first amino
acid in a protein sequence and it can occur at other
positions. Consequently, additional techniques are
required to identify the start of an ORF.
In a mRNA molecule, the start codon may be
flanked by a Kozak sequence (CCGCCAUGG) and
finding this sequence helps to identify the 5′ end of
the gene. Analysis of the codon usage can also be
helpful since there are marked differences between

167

Bioinformatics

Query Sequence:
10
0 TCCATTGAGC
50 GAATTTCAGA
100 CTTGTGGAAT
150 TTCAGTTTTC
200 AACTCTATAA

20
CTTATACCAG
TTGTGAATCC
GAAGAGATGA
CTTTTTCAGA
GACCGTGTGG

30
TAACATCTAC
TCACTTACTG
AAAATCAGAT
GCATACCAGA
GAAATCTCTC

40
ACTCGAAGAT
AAAGATCTTA
TATTGCATGC
AATTCCTGAT
AGAAGACTGT

50
CTTGTCAGGG
CTGAGCGGGG
AATGGCTCCA
GACCTGAAGC
TCTCAAGATG

10
20
30
40
0 SIEPYTSNIY TRRSCQGNFR L!ILTY!KIL LSGACGMKR!
50 FSFPFSEHTR NS!!PEATL! DRVGNLSEDC SQD

50
KIRLLHAMAP

Six-Frame Amino Acid Translation:
Forward 0

Forward 1
10
20
30
40
0 PLSLIPVTST LEDLVRGISD CESSLTERSY !AGLVE!RDE
50 SVFLFQSIPE IPDDLKQLYK TVWEISQKTV LKM

50
KSDYCMQWLH

Forward 2
10
20
30
40
0 H!ALYQ!HLH SKILSGEFQI VNPHLLKDLT ERGLWNEEMK
50 QFSFFRAYQK FLMT!SNSIR PCGKSLRRLF SR

50
NQIIACNGSI

Reverse 0
10
20
30
40
0 HLENSLLRDF PHGLIELLQV IRNFWYALKK EN!MEPLHAI
50 PRSVRSFSK! GFTI!NSPDK IFECRCYWYK AQW

50
I!FFISSFHK

Reverse 1
10
20
30
40
0 ILRTVF!EIS HTVL!SCFRS SGISGML!KR KTEWSHCMQ!
50 PAQ!DLSVSE DSQSEIPLTR SSSVDVTGIR LNG

Fig. 9.5 A six-frame translation of an
arbitrary DNA sequence. ! denotes a stop
codon. (From Attwood & Parry-Smith 1999
© Pearson Education Limited 1999, reprinted
by permission of Pearson Education Ltd.)

Reverse 2
10
20
30
40
0 S!EQSSERFP TRSYRVASGH QEFLVCSEKG KLNGAIACNN
50 PLSKIFQ!VR IHNLKFP!QD LRV!MLLV!G SM

coding and non-coding regions. Also, the use of
codons for particular amino acids varies according to species (Table 9.4). These codon-use rules
break down in sequences that are not destined to be
translated. Such untranslated regions often have
an uncharacteristically high representation of rarely
used codons. The identification of segments with a
much higher than average GC content, and a higher
than average frequency of the CpG dinucleotide,
could be indicative of a CpG island. Such islands
are found at the 5′ end of many vertebrate genes
(Ioshikhes & Zhang 2000). As a final aid to finding
ORFs, use can be made of the bias towards G or C
as the third base in a codon. Although all of these
Table 9.4
Percentage use of the
different serine codons
in different organisms.
(Reproduced with
permission from
Attwood & ParrySmith 1999.)

Codon
AGT
AGC
TCG
TCA
TCT
TCC

50
SDFSSLHSTS

50
LIFHLFIPQA

tools can be applied manually to a DNA sequence,
sophisticated computer programs are available (see
below) that will do this for you.
There is an important caveat associated with
the searching of nucleotide sequences for ORFs. If
care is not taken at the sequencing stage then errors
can creep into the finished sequence (see p. 131).
Although incorrect base calling is undesirable, its
effects are fairly minimal unless it results in the
erroneous creation or elimination of a termination
codon. More important, an erroneous single-base
addition or deletion (“phantom indels”) will disturb
the reading frame and make correct identification
of the ORF much more difficult.

Escherichia coli

Drosophila

Human

Maize

Yeast

3
20
4
2
34
37

1
23
17
2
9
48

10
34
9
5
13
28

3
30
22
4
4
37

5
4
1
6
52
33

168

CHAPTER 9

Algorithms have been developed that find
genes automatically
The most important single development in genome
annotation is the use of computers to predict the
existence of genes in unprocessed genome-sequence
data (see reviews by Fickett 1996, Claverie 1997,
Burge & Karlin 1998, Lewis et al. 2000 and Gaasterland & Oprea 2001). Before the advent of such algorithms, genes in large genomic constructs had to be
identified by painstaking experiments, and several
years could be spent finding genes in a section of
genomic DNA that had been identified by linkage
analysis (Box 9.2). The advantage of computer-based
prediction is its speed – annotation can be carried
out concurrently with sequencing itself – but a
disadvantage is its accuracy, particularly in the
complex genome of higher eukaryotes. Essentially,
two strategies are used for gene prediction: homology searching and ab initio prediction. Homologysearching programs compare genomic-sequence data
to gene, cDNA, EST, and protein sequences already
present in databases, and are based on the BLAST
or FASTA algorithms discussed above. Ab initio prediction algorithms search for gene-specific features
such as promoters, splice sites, and polyadenylation

sites or for pertinent gene content, such as ORFs.
Many of the currently available programs combine
different search criteria, and their sensitivities vary
widely (e.g. see Burset & Guigó 1996).
The identification of ORFs exceeding a certain
length (usually about 300 nucleotides, equivalent
to 100 amino acids) is sufficient to find most genes
in prokaryote genomes. Genuine genes that are
smaller than this will be missed if such a threshold
is rigorously applied, and there are also difficulties
in identifying so-called shadow genes, i.e. overlapping ORFs on opposite strands. However, ambiguities arising from this type of genome organization
can be resolved using algorithms that incorporate Markov models to highlight differences in base
composition between genes and non-coding DNA,
e.g. GENMARK (Borodovsky & McIninch 1993),
a modified GeneScan algorithm (Ramakrishna &
Srinivasan 1999), and Glimmer (Salzberg et al.
1999). As a result, it is now possible to identify all
genes with near certainty in bacterial genomes. For
example, Ramakrishna & Srinivasan (1999), using
the improved GeneScan algorithm, reported a near
100% success rate in three microbial genomes –
Hemophilus influenze, Plasmodium falciparum, and
Mycoplasma genitalium.

Box 9.2 Traditional methods for finding genes
It is hard to imagine in these days of
sequencing projects and computer-based
annotation the difficulty faced by researchers
in the 1970s and 1980s in tracking down
genes responsible for particular traits in higher
eukaryotes. If some biochemical information
was available about the gene or its product,
it was sometimes possible to devise a cloning
strategy that allowed direct isolation of the
gene from a suitable cDNA or genomic library
(functional cloning; p. 119). However, for most
traits (including thousands of inherited human
diseases), no relevant biochemical information
was available. In such cases, positional cloning
(p. 120) strategies were developed in which
the gene was first mapped to a particular
candidate region, and this was progressively
narrowed down to a small number of clones
spanning the disease locus.

At this stage, various transcript-mapping
strategies could be employed:
•

•

Hybridization of genomic clones to zoo blots.
This approach is based on the observation
that coding sequences are strongly
conserved during evolution, whereas noncoding DNA generally is not. DNA from a
genomic clone that may contain a gene is
hybridized to a Southern blot containing
whole-genomic DNA from a variety
of species (a zoo blot). At reduced
stringency, probes containing human
genes, for example, will generate strong
hybridization signals on genomic DNA
from other animals (Monaco et al. 1986).
Hybridization of genomic clones to
northern/reverse northern blots and cDNA
libraries. The major defining feature of a
continued

169

Bioinformatics

Box 9.2 continued
gene is that it is expressed, producing an
RNA transcript. Therefore, if a genomic
clone hybridizes to a northern blot (a blot
containing only RNA) or a reverse northern
blot (a blot containing cDNA, which is
derived from RNA) or a cDNA library, it is
likely that the genomic clone contains a
gene. Unfortunately, this technique relies
on the gene being expressed at a
significant level in the tissue used to
prepare the RNA or cDNA since the
sensitivity is low. Part of the sensitivity
problem reflects the small exons and large
introns characteristic of higher eukaryote
genes, which means that large genomic
clones may only contain a few hundred
base pairs of expressed DNA.
• Identification of CpG islands. CpG islands
are short stretches of hypomethylated
GC-rich DNA often found associated with
vertebrate genes. Their function is unclear,
but about 50% of human genes have
associated CpG islands and these motifs
can be exploited for gene identification.
One approach is to search raw sequence
data for CpG islands by computer.
However, the sequences found in
CpG islands are scarce in bulk genomic
DNA so certain rare-cutter restriction
enzymes, such as SacII (which recognizes
the site CCGCGG), generate small
fragments which can indicate the
presence of a gene (Cross & Bird 1995).
An alternative PCR-based technique has
also been used to identify CpG islands
(Valdes et al. 1994).
• cDNA selection and cDNA capture. In the
cDNA selection approach (Lovett et al.
1991, Parimoo et al. 1991) an amplified
cDNA library is hybridized to immobilized
genomic clones covering the candidate
genomic region. Of the cDNAs selected
by this procedure, at least one should
correspond to the desired gene. More
recently, hybridization has been carried out
in solution (cDNA capture) to enrich for
cDNAs corresponding to a genomic clone.
As above, this technique relies on adequate

•

expression of the target gene in the
tissue used for cDNA preparation, but its
sensitivity is much greater than other blotbased techniques. One further problem
that has been encountered with this
approach is the hybridization of cDNAs to
(non-expressed) repetitive DNA elements
and pseudogenes (see Lovett 1994).
Exon trapping (exon amplification). This
technique was independently devised by
a number of research groups and involves
an artificial splicing assay (Auch & Reth
1990, Duyk et al. 1990, Buckler et al. 1991,
Hamaguchi et al. 1992). The advantage
of this over the RNA/cDNA methods
discussed above is that there is no need
for the gene to be expressed. The general
principle is that a genomic clone is inserted
into an “intron” flanked by two artificial
exons within an expression vector. The
vector is then introduced into mammalian
cells by transfection and the recombinant
expression cassette is transcribed and
spliced to yield an artificial mRNA that
can be amplified by RT-PCR. If the genomic
clone does not contain an exon, the RTPCR product will contain the two artificial
exons in the vector and will be of a defined
size. If the genomic clone does contain
an exon, it will be spliced into the mature
transcript and the RT-PCR product will be
larger than expected (Church & Buckler
1999). Cosmid-based exon trap vectors
can be used to trap multiple exons in one
experiment (Datson et al. 1996, den
Dunnen 1999).

Powerful as these methods are, they are
limited by the fact that experiments have to
be carried out at the bench on individual DNA
clones. This is suitable where the goal is to
identify individual genes, but for the highthroughput annotation of entire genomes, this
is simply not fast enough to keep up with the
rate at which sequence data accumulate. For
predominantly this reason, bioinformatics has
largely replaced experimental approaches to
gene identification.

170

CHAPTER 9

Table 9.5 Types of algorithms used for searching for genes in DNA sequences.

Type of algorithm

Principle

Examples

Neural network
(Uberacher & Mural 1991)

These are analytical techniques modeled on the processes
of learning in cognitive systems. They use a data-training
set to build rules that can make predictions or
classifications on datasets

GRAIL

Rule-based system

Uses an explicit set of rules to make decisions

GeneFinder

Hidden Markov model
(Burge & Karlin 1997)

Represents a system as a set of discrete states and
transitions between those states. Markov models are
“hidden” when one or more of the states cannot be
directly observed. Each transition has an associated
probability. Has the advantage of explicitly modeling how
the individual probabilities of a sequence of features are
combined into a probability estimate for the whole gene

GENSCAN
GENIE
HMMGene
GeneMarkHMM
FGENEH

Several sophisticated software algorithms have
been devised to handle gene prediction in eukaryotic
genomes. Some of these gene predictors only predict
a single feature, e.g. the exon predictors HEXON and
MZEF. Most, however, attempt to use the output of
several algorithms to generate a whole-gene model
in which a gene is defined as a series of exons that
are coordinately transcribed. The principles used in
these algorithms are summarized in Table 9.5. Most
of these algorithms are available free of charge over
the Internet, as listed in Box 9.3.

What features of eukaryotic genes are recognized
by gene-prediction programs? All protein-coding
genes are transcribed and translated, so transcriptional and translational control signals, such
as the TATA box, cap site, Kozak consensus, and
polyadenylation site would seem useful targets.
Unfortunately, the diversity of eukaryotic promoters
in combination with the small size of these target
motifs detracts from their usefulness. For example,
a TATA box is found in only about 70% of
human genes (Fickett & Hatzigeorgiou 1997) while

Box 9.3 Internet resources for genome annotation
Gene prediction software
http://genomic.sanger.ac.uk/gf/gfs.shtml
FGENEH
http://www1.imim.es/geneid.html GENEID
http://www.fruitfly.org/seq_tools/genie.html
GENIE
http://CCR-081.mit.edu/GENSCAN.html
GENSCAN
http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/HMMgene
HMMGene
http://genemark.biology.gatech.edu/
GeneMark GeneMarkHMM
http://compbio.ornl.gov GRAIL
http://www.tigr.org/softlab/glimmer/
glimmer.html GlimmerM

http://www.itba.mi.cnr.it/webgene
GeneBuilder
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Wise2
Wise2/Genewise
http://blocks.fhcrc.org BLOCKS
Sites providing information on annotation
http://www.fruitfly.org/GASP1 Genome
Annotation Assessment Project
http://www.geneontology.org Gene
Ontology project
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro InterPro

Bioinformatics

polyadenylation signals can differ considerably from
the consensus sequence AATAAA. Additionally,
such signals identify only the first and last exons of a
gene. Splice signals are much more useful because
they define each exon and are almost invariant.
Early gene-finding models assumed independence
between positions in the 5′ and 3′ splice sites. More
recently, however, dependencies between positions
have been identified and have been built into geneprediction algorithms (e.g. Burge & Karlin 1993). As
well as these feature-dependent methods, differences
in base composition between coding and non-coding
DNA play an important role in gene prediction.
Fickett and Tung (1992) compared a large number
of base-composition para-meters in coding and
non-coding DNA, and reached the conclusion that
comparisons of hexamer base composition gave
the best discrimination. Many of the currently
used gene-prediction programs incorporate Markov
models to distinguish hexamer usage between
coding and non-coding DNA.
It should be stressed that each of these geneprediction algorithms needs to be “trained” with
data or else implanted with a set of rules. These
activities are essential so that the algorithm can
recognize key features that distinguish a gene or
exon from non-coding DNA. These features are not
identical in all organisms. Thus an algorithm trained
with nematode DNA will not perform satisfactorily
with plant DNA without being retrained. For example, GRAIL is one of the oldest gene-prediction
programs and can be used with human, mouse,
Arabidopsis, Drosophila, and E. coli sequences but
GENIE has been trained only on human and
Drosophila sequences.
Even when an algorithm has been trained with
data from a particular species it is not 100% accurate at identifying genes. This has been addressed
in an ongoing international collaborative venture
called the Genome Annotation aSsessment Project
(GASP). For example, Reese et al. (2000) selected
two well-characterized regions of the Drosophila
genome and presented the nucleotide sequence to
the authors of the various algorithms for analysis.
The best gene predictor had a sensitivity (detection of
true positives) of 40% and a specificity (elimination
of false positives) of 30% when required to predict
entire gene structures. The errors generated included
incorrect calling of exon boundaries, missed or
phantom exons, or failure to detect entire genes. In a
similar study using human DNA, Fortna & Gardiner
(2001) found that the best results were obtained

171

by running five different programs and counting
consensus exons obtained from any two or more
programs (Table 9.6).
The algorithms described in Table 9.5 are known
as ab initio programs since they attempt to predict
genes from sequence data without the use of prior
knowledge about similarities to other genes. Finding
genes in long sequences can be facilitated by looking for matches with sequences that are known to
be transcribed, e.g. a cDNA, an EST, or even a gene
in another species. The pace of genome annotation
changed radically with the growth of EST data, since
genomic sequences could be rapidly screened for
EST hits to identify potential genes. EST clones are
derived from the 3′ ends of polyA+ transcripts and
contain 3′ untranslated sequences (Box 9.1). However, they often extend far enough towards the 5′
end to reach the coding sequence and thus overlap
with predicted exons but they cannot be expected
to identify all coding exons. It should be noted that
not all ESTs can be assumed to be reliable indicators
of a gene or a mature mRNA. In some cases they
can be derived from unprocessed intronic sequences,
primed from the genomic polyA tract, or from processed pseudogenes.
The current trend in gene prediction is to make
as much use of sequence-similarity data as possible.
The latest generation of gene-prediction algorithms,
such as Grail/Exp, GenieEST and GenomeScan (Yeh
et al. 2001), combine ab initio predictions with similarity data into a single probability model. Both
Reese et al. (2000) and Fortna & Gardiner (2001)
found that algorithms that take similarity data into
account are better at predicting gene structure.
Additional algorithms are necessary to find
non-coding RNA genes and regulatory
elements
In all cells, but particularly multicellular eukaryotes,
there is much more to the genome than coding
regions. For example, analysis of non-coding RNAs
and regulatory regions can provide much useful
information. Of the non-coding RNAs, rRNAs are the
easiest to find and this usually is done by similarity
searching. tRNAs can be found by using tRNAScanSE, a program that includes searching for characteristic structural features such as the ability to form
hairpins (Eddy 1999). More recently there has been
intense interest in the detection and identification
of genes for short regulatory RNA molecules variously known as small temporal RNAs (stRNAs)

8
23
21
7
6
12

AP001753 AGPAT3
TMEM1
PWP2H
C21orf33
KIAA0653
DNMT3L

0
4
0
0
2
2
6
0

5
2
1

124 47

7
8
17 12
17
2
4
0
4
2
10
1

1
6
2
0
19
9
7
4

14
1
2

48

1
6
4
3
2
2

0
1
5
2
3
2
6
5

3
2
1

FP ME

GRAIL

6
6
4
4
2
0

0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0

2
1
0

41

1
3
1
0
1
1

0
3
4
2
7
1
6
5

0
3
3

FP ME

131 28

7
20
20
7
5
11

1
4
3
0
15
10
7
4

17
0
0

TP

Genscan

1
1
1
0
0
0

0
3
1
1
4
4
8
2

1
4
1

62

2
10
7
4
4
6

1
5
3
2
3
2
6
2

3
2
0

FP ME

110 32

6
13
14
3
2
6

0
2
4
0
19
9
7
7

14
1
3

TP

MZEF

* Consistent exon predictions from any two or more programs.
† Exon predictions from ESTs alone.
‡ Consistent exon prediction from EST match and any one or more exon programs.
TP, True positives; FP, false positives; ME, missed exons.

172

1
7
7
2
22
11
13
9

AP001717 PRKCBP2
IFNGR2
C21orf4
C21orf55
GART
SON
CRYZL1
B17

Total

17
3
3

No. of
exons TP

AP001715 B3/GCFC
ORF4
B37

Accession
no.
Gene

5
7
1
1
1
4

0
3
1
0
0
1
1
1

4
0
1

45

1
5
2
2
0
6

0
3
3
2
3
4
5
4

1
3
1

FP ME

127 31

7
18
19
5
6
6

1
4
4
0
19
7
8
5

16
0
2

TP

FGENES

7
7
6
0
1
3

0
3
0
0
1
1
0
1

2
0
0

49

1
9
2
1
1
1

0
4
7
2
8
1
6
1

0
3
2

FP ME

123 32

7
14
19
6
5
11

1
3
0
0
14
10
7
8

17
0
1

TP

FGENE H

5
6
3
0
0
1

0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1

4
1
0

25

1
4
0
0
1
1

0
2
3
2
2
0
5
2

0
2
0

FP ME

147 24

7
19
21
7
5
11

1
5
4
0
20
11
8
7

17
1
3

TP

≥2 Exons*

5
25
4
4
0
3

0
8
5
0
9
23
14
6

19
9
4

FP

145 138

8
16
18
7
4
10

1
7
7
1
22
11
12
9

9
2
1

TP

ESTs†

27

0
7
3
0
2
2

0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0

8
1
2

ME

2
2
0

131 41

7
1
15 12
18
3
7
1
4
0
10
1

41

1
8
3
0
2
2

0
1
3
2
1
1
4
1

8
2
2

FP ME

1
0
6
2
4
1
0
0
21
2
10 11
9
2
8
1

9
1
1

TP

Exon + EST‡

Table 9.6 Exon predictions using different exon search programs with and without expressed sequence tags (ESTs). For each gene the actual number of exons has been
experimentally verified. (Reprinted from Fortna & Gardiner 2001 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

172
CHAPTER 9

Bioinformatics

or micro-RNAs (miRNAs) (Kim 2005). These are
discussed in more detail in Chapter 15.
Regulatory regions are particularly important
sequence features of genomes. To date, a relatively
small number of transcriptional-factor binding
sites have been identified by classical experimental
methods. The existence of such sites in a query
sequence is suggestive of a regulatory region.
However, these sequences typically are fairly short
and could occur by chance. Better evidence for
such regulatory regions is their conservation in
the sequences upstream from the same gene in two
related species, e.g. mouse and human.

Several in silico methods are available for
the functional annotation of genes
The simplest way to identify the function of new
genes, or putative genes, is to search for sequence
homologs that have functions assigned already.
The principle upon which bioinformatics is built
is that similar sequences yield similar structures,
and similar structures have similar functions. If a
putative protein encoded by an uncharacterized ORF
shows statistically significant similarity to another
protein of known function, this strongly indicates
that the ORF in question is a bona fide new gene and
identifies its function. A search of this kind is initially undertaken with BLAST or FASTA to identify
close-sequence relatives.
Significant matches of a novel gene to another
sequence may be in any of four classes (Oliver 1996).
First, a match may predict both the biochemical and
physiological function of the novel gene. An example
is ORF YCR24c, identified during the whole-genome
sequencing of S. cerevisiae, which has a closesequence similarity to an Asn-tRNA synthetase from
E. coli. Second, a match may define the biochemical function of a gene product without revealing its
cellular function. An example of this is five protein
kinase genes found on yeast chromosome III whose
biochemical function is clear (they phosphorylate
proteins) but whose particular physiological function in yeast is unknown. Third, a match may be to a
gene from another organism whose function in that
organism is unknown. For example, ORF YCR63w
from yeast matched protein G10 from Xenopus
and novel genes from Caenorhabditis elegans and
humans but at the time the function of all of them
was unknown. Finally, a match may occur to a gene
of known function that merely reveals that our

173

understanding of that function is superficial, e.g.
yeast ORF YCL17c and the NifS protein of nitrogenfixing bacteria. After similar sequences were found
in a number of bacteria that do not fix nitrogen it
was shown that the NifS protein is a pyridoxal
phosphate-dependent aminotransferase.
If a standard BLAST or FASTA search fails to
identify a homolog that has already been annotated,
more advanced search tools can be employed. One
example is PSI-BLAST, an extension of the basic
BLAST program which can identify three times as
many related sequences. The principle of PSI-BLAST
is iterated database searching, where the results of a
standard BLAST search are collected into a profile,
which is then used for a second round of searching.
The process can be repeated for a defined number of
cycles as determined by the user, or it can be repeated
indefinitely until no more hits are obtained.
Even more distant relationships can be found
by pattern matching, in which large collections of
sequences are aligned and screened for conserved
features. The simplest example of pattern matching
is the consensus sequence, which is a representation of the most common residue found at each
position of a multiple alignment. More complex
sequence patterns and profiles are based on similar
principles, but allow variation at each position to
be represented. Pattern matching is implemented in
the secondary-sequence databases discussed earlier
in the chapter (Eddy 1998).
Structures can be used in addition to sequences
for functional annotation. This is because protein
structures are far better conserved than sequences
over evolutionary time. Proteins that show less than
10% sequence identity can have very similar structures, and structural comparisons can therefore
reveal more distant evolutionary relationships than
any of the sequence-based methods. We return to
this topic in Chapter 22.
As is the case for sequences and structures, the
large amount of information now available about
protein functions makes it necessary to develop
systems for functional classification. Several such
systems have been devised. One of the oldest and
best established, but which only applies to enzymes,
is the Enzyme Commission hierarchical system
for enzyme classification. Other more general
approaches are used in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (http://www.genome.ad.jp/
kegg/), and most recently, the Gene Ontology system (http://www.geneontology.org/). Gene ontology
(Ashburner et al. 2000) is a classification system

174

CHAPTER 9

(a)

DNA metabolism

DNA degradation

DNA recombination
CDC9 mei-9 Lig1
Lig3

DNA packaging

DNA repair

DNA replication

REV3 Rad 1 Lig1
mei-9 Lig3
mus209
hay
Rad51

RNH35 RntL Recc1
RNR1 RnrS Rrm1
Rrm2

Mitochondrial
genome maintenance

DNA-dependent
DNA replication
Mitochondrial
DNA-dependent
DNA replication

DNA ligation
CDC9 DNA-lig I Lig1
DNA-lig II Lig3

Pre-replicative complex
formation and maintenance
MCM2
MCM3
CDC54/MCM4
CDC46/MCM5
MCM6
CDC47/MCM7

Mcm2
Mcm3
Mcm4
Mcm5
Mcm6
Mcm7

DNA strand elongation
Pcna
DNA pol-α 180
Recc1

Mcmd2
Mcmd
Mcmd4

DNA
unwinding
MCM2
Mcmd6
MCM3
CDC54/MCM4
Orc2
CDC46/MCM5
MCM6
CSC47/MCM7

Lagging strand
elongation
CDC2
DPB11
Leading strand
POL2
elongation
CDC9
mus209
CDC2
DNA pol-δ DPB11
hay
POL2
Rad51

DNA
priming

DNA
initiation
lat
MCM2
MCM3
CDC54/MCM4
Mcmd4
CDC46/MCM5
Mcmd5
MCM6
CDC47/MCM7

SACCHAROMYCES
Drosophila
Mus

(b)

Molecular function
Nucleic acid binding

Enzyme

Helicase

DNA binding

Chromatin binding
MCM2 Mcm2
MCM3 Mcm3
CDC54/MCM4
CDC46/MCM5 Mcm5
MCM6 Mcm6
CDC47/MCM7 Mcm7

SACCHAROMYCES
Drosophila
Mus

Mcmd2
Mcmd
Mcmd4

Adenosine
triphosphatase

DNA
helicase

DNA
helicase
hay
mus309

Mcmd6
Mcmd7

ATP-dependent
DNA helicase
MCM2
MCM3
CDC54/MCM4 Mcmd4
CDC46/MCM5
MCM6 Mcmd6
CDC47/MCM7 Mcmd7

Lamin/chromatin
binding

(c)

DNA-dependent
adenosine
triphosphatase
Rad51

Cell
Cytoplasm

Enzyme

DNA-lig I

REV3 DNA-lig II
mus309
hay

Mcmd
MCM2
MCM3
CDC54/MCM4
CDC46/MCM5
MCM6
CDC47/MCM7

Mcmd4
Mcmd5

Pre-replicative
complex
MCM2 Mcm2 Mcmd2
MCM3 Mcm3 Mcmd
CDC54/MCM4 Mcm4 Mcmd4
CDC46/MCM5 Mcm5
MCM6 Mcm6 Mcmd6
CDC47/MCM7 Mcm7 Mcmd7

Nucleolus

Nuclear
membrane
Nucleoplasm

Alpha DNA polymerase:
primase complex
Delta DNA polymerase
CDC2 Pold1 DNA pol-δ
Pold2 mus209

Replication fork
MCM2
MCM3
CDC54/MCM4
CDC46/MCM5
MCM6
CDC47/MCM7

DNA replication factor A complex
SACCHAROMYCES
Drosophila
Mus

DNA replication factor C complex

Origin recognition
complex
ORC2 Orc2 Orc2

Fig. 9.6 Examples of gene ontology.
Three examples illustrate the structure and
style used by gene ontology to represent the
gene ontologies and to associate genes with
nodes within an ontology. The ontologies
are built from a structured, controlled
vocabulary. The illustrations are the
products of work in progress and are subject
to change when new evidence becomes
available. For simplicity, not all known
gene annotations have been included in
the figures. (a) Biological process ontology.
This section illustrates a portion of the
biological process ontology describing
DNA metabolism. Note that a node may
have more than one parent. For example,
“DNA ligation” has three parents: “DNAdependent DNA replication”; “DNA repair”;
and “DNA recombination”. (b) Molecular
function ontology. The ontology is
not intended to represent a reaction
pathway, but instead reflects conceptual
categories of gene-product function. A gene
product can be associated with more than
one node within an ontology, as illustrated
by the MCM proteins. These proteins have
been shown to bind chromatin and to
possess ATP-dependent DNA helicase
activity, and are annotated to both nodes.
(c) Cellular component ontology. The
ontologies are designed for a generic
eukaryotic cell, and are flexible enough to
represent the known differences between
diverse organisms. (Reprinted from
Ashburner et al. 2000 by permission of
Nature Publishing Group, New York.)

Bioinformatics

that enables protein function to be related to
gross cellular or whole-organism functions such
as central metabolism, nucleic acid replication, cell
division, pathogenesis, etc. (Fig. 9.6). It combines
the breadth required to describe biological functions
among very diverse species with the specificity and
depth needed to distinguish a particular protein
from another member of the same family. All the
organism-specific databases are using the standard
gene ontology vocabulary to annotate genes and proteins (Stein 2001).

Caution must be exercised when using
purely in silico methods to annotate
genomes
Many different genomes have been completely
sequenced and as the sequence data accumulate,
attempts are made, using the tools described above,
to identify all the genes and ascribe functions to them.
However, a predicted gene or predicted protein
function is exactly that – a prediction. The reliability
of that prediction depends on the experimental data
to support it. Therefore, in annotating genes and
genomes, biologists must use their own knowledge
and intuition plus information from the literature to
design experiments to support their interpretations.
An example is provided by Pollack (2001) who found
that examination of genomic or enzymatic data
alone provided an incomplete picture of metabolic
function in the bacterium Ureaplasma urealyticum.
The genome of U. urealyticum is 752 kb in length
and has 613 protein-coding genes and 39 RNAcoding genes. Biological roles have been ascribed
to 53% of the protein-coding genes, 19% have no
known function although they are similar to other
orphan genes, and 28% are genes with no significant
relationship to any other gene in any database (Glass
et al. 2000). The metabolism of Ureaplasma has been
studied for a long time and hence one would expect a
good fit between annotated genes and known
enzyme activities. Although in the majority of cases
there is such agreement, a considerable number of
examples were found where there were annotated
genes without detectable activity (e.g. deoxyguanosine kinase, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl
transferase) or reported enzyme activity without
annotation (e.g. pyruvate carboxylase, aspartate
aminotransferase).
There are a number of explanations for the apparent disagreement between biological function and

175

gene annotation. These include inaccurate sequencing, inaccurate annotation, mistakes in carrying
out enzymatic assays, mutations in crucial residues
that eliminate enzymatic activity, and differences
between strains. It could be that the annotation
is correct but that post-translational modification
renders the enzyme undetectable or inactive or the
enzyme only is synthesized in certain media or
environmental conditions. For genome annotation
it is therefore essential to bring biologists and bioinformaticians together and get them working in
teams where they can both stimulate and challenge
each other. Stein (2001) has reviewed the different
organizational models that have been used for
these annotation teams. Given the importance of
genome annotation, it is essential that different teams
use similar methods. Fortunately, standard genome
annotation languages are gaining general acceptance. GAME is particularly valuable for describing
experimental evidence that supports an annotation
and DAS (distributed annotation system) is particularly useful for indexing and visualization. These are
accompanied by a number of software tools (e.g.
BioPerl, BioPython, BioJava, and BioCORBA) for
storing, manipulating, and visualizing these genome
annotations.

Sequencing also provides new data for
molecular phylogenetics
The major use of DNA and protein sequence data
is the analysis of cellular function. However, the
data also can be used to investigate the evolution of
genes and their protein products and this is known
as molecular phylogeny. There are two approaches
to building models of sequence evolution (Whelan
et al. 2001). Empirical models are built through
comparisons of large numbers of observed sequences
whereas parametric models are built on the basis
of the chemical or biological properties of DNA and
amino acids.
The parametric approach is favored for studies
on DNA evolution and the parameters used are base
frequency, base exchangeability, and rate heterogeneity. The base frequency parameter describes the
frequency of the bases A, G, C, and T averaged over
all sequence sites and is influenced by the overall GC
content. Base exchangeability describes the relative
tendencies for one base to be substituted for another
and base transitions (purine/purine and pyrimidine/
pyrimidine) are expected to be more frequent

176

CHAPTER 9

than base transversions (purine/pyrimidine). Rate
heterogeneity is the variation in mutation rates
along a stretch of DNA because of biochemical constraints, structural features, etc.
In contrast to phylogenetic studies with DNA,
those on proteins use the empirical approach in
which the number of amino acid substitutions is
computed. On its own, the number of changes is not
very revealing and so phylogenists use sophisticated
statistical methods such as maximum likelihood to
make inferences about the patterns and processes
of evolution. Since proteins are encoded by DNA it
might be assumed that protein and DNA phylogenies
would be identical but this is not necessarily so.
The reason for this is that silent mutations occur in
DNA because of the redundancy of the genetic code.
Mutations at the DNA level that do not result in
amino acid substitutions only get incorporated into
DNA phylogenies.

Suggested reading
Atwood T.K. & Parry-Smith D.J. (1999) Introduction to
Bioinformatics. Addison Wesley Longman, Harlow.
Benoit G. (2005) Bioinformatics. Annual Review of
Information Science 39, 179–218.
Goodman N. (2002) Biological data becomes computer
literate: new advances in bioinformatics. Current
Opinion in Biotechnology 13, 68–71.
Orengo C.A., Jones D.T. & Thornton J.M. (eds) (2003)
Advanced Text. Bioinformatics: Genes, Proteins and
Computers. BIOS Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
Patterson M. & Handel M. (eds.) (1998) Trends guide
to bioinformatics. A supplement to Trends in Genetics,
1998.
Reffern O., Grant A., Maibaum M., et al. (2005) Survey of current protein family databases and their
application in comparative, structural and functional
genomics. Journal of Chromatography 815, 97–107.
Stern L. (2001) Genome annotation: from sequence to
biology. Nature Review Genetics 2, 493–503.

Part II
Manipulating DNA in Microbes, Plants, and Animals

CHAPTER 10
Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

Introduction
For many experiments it is convenient to use E. coli
as a recipient for genes cloned from eukaryotes or
other prokaryotes. Transformation is easy and there
is available a wide range of easy-to-use vectors with
specialist properties, e.g. regulatable high-level gene
expression. However, use of E. coli is not always practicable because it lacks some auxiliary biochemical pathways that are essential for the phenotypic
expression of certain functions, e.g. degradation of
aromatic compounds, antibiotic synthesis, pathogenicity, sporulation, etc. In such circumstances,
the genes have to be cloned back into species similar
to those from which they were derived.
There are three prerequisites for cloning genes in
a new host. First, there needs to be a method for
introducing the DNA of interest into the potential
recipient. The methods available include transformation, conjugation, and electroporation, and these
will be discussed in more detail later. Secondly, the
introduced DNA needs to be maintained in the new
host. Either it must function as a replicon in its
new environment or it has to be integrated into
the chromosome or a pre-existing plasmid. Finally,
the uptake and maintenance of the cloned genes
will only be detected if they are expressed. Thus the
inability to detect a cloned gene in a new bacterial
host could be due to failure to introduce the gene,
to maintain it or to express it, or to a combination
of these factors. Another cause of failure could be
restriction. For example, the frequency of transformation of Pseudomonas putida with plasmid RSF1010 is
105 transformants/µg DNA, but only if the plasmid is
prepared from another P. putida strain. Otherwise,
no transformants are obtained (Bagdasarian et al.
1979). Similarly, the frequency of transformation
of Pseudomonas stutzeri with plasmid DNA that has
been prepared from E. coli is 43 times higher if
the recepient strain is defective for host restriction
(Berndt et al. 2003). Wilkins et al. (1996) have noted

that conjugative transfer of promiscuous IncP plasmids is unusually sensitive to restriction.
Many bacteria are naturally competent
for transformation
DNA can be transferred between different strains
of E. coli by the three classical methods of conjugation, transduction, and transformation, as well as
by the newer method of electroporation. For genemanipulation work, transformation is nearly always
used. The reasons for this are threefold. First, it is
relatively simple to do, particularly now that competent cells are commercially available. Secondly,
it can be very efficient. Efficiencies of 108–109 transformants/µg plasmid DNA are readily achievable
and are more than adequate for most applications.
Thirdly, self-transmissible cloning vectors are much
larger than their non-transmissible counterparts
because they have to carry all the genes required
for conjugal transfer.
The strains of E. coli used in gene manipulation are
not naturally transformable. Rather, competence is
induced by chemically treating the cells (see p. 24).
By contrast, over 40 species of bacteria are known to
be naturally transformable (Lorenz & Wackernagel
1994). Transformation in these organisms differs
in a number of respects from chemically induced
competence in E. coli. First, with the exception of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, competence for transformation
is a transient phenomenon. Second, transformation
can be sequence independent, as in Bacillus subtilis
and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, but in other species
(Hemophilus influenzae, N. gonorrhoeae) it is dependent
on the presence of specific uptake sequences. Third,
the mechanism of natural transformation involves
nuclease cleavage of the DNA duplex and degradation of one of the two strands so that a linear single
strand can enter the cell. This mechanism of DNA
uptake is not compatible with efficient plasmid transformation and geneticists working with B. subtilis have

180

CHAPTER 10

developed specialized methods for overcoming this
problem (see Box. 10.1). For work with other species,
electroporation (see p. 25) offers a much simpler
alternative although the efficiency may be very low.
For example, in Methanococcus voltae electroporation
yielded only 102 transformants/µg plasmid DNA
(Tumbula & Whitman 1999).
Genetic analysis of a number of model organisms
has shown that the mechanism of DNA uptake has
been conserved in Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria (Fig. 10.1) and shares a number of features
with Type II secretion systems. By contrast, the regulation of competence is not conserved although a
number of distinct mechanisms can be recognized.
Based on such studies with model organisms it is
possible to define a set of genes encoding homologous proteins potentially related to DNA uptake.
Using various bioinformatics tools it is possible to
search for similar genes in those organisms whose
genomes have been completely sequenced. If these
genes are found in a particular bacterium then it
suggests that that bacterium could be naturally
transformable (Claverys & Martin 2003). Such analysis indicated that Lactococcus lactis, Listeria monocytogenes, Streptococcus pyogenes, and even E. coli could be
naturally transformable.
Given that plasmid transformation is difficult in
many non-enteric bacteria, conjugation represents

(a)

(b)

PilQ

PilQ

OM

ComGC

PilE

ComEA

ComE
CM

N
ComA

ComA

CM

N
Com
EC

Com
EC

ComFA

Fig. 10.1 Organization of the DNA uptake machinery
in a Gram-negative bacterium (Neisseria gonorrhoeae)
and a Gram-positive bacterium (Bacillus subtilis). (a) In
N. gonorrhoeae, exogenous DNA binds to the bacterial
surface and crosses the outer membrane (OM) through PilQ.
A pilin complex made of PilE is required for DNA to traverse
the periplasm and the peptidoglycan layer aided by the
DNA-binding protein ComE. (b) In B. subtilis, ComGC is
required for DNA to access the DNA-binding protein
ComEA. DNA then is delivered to a nuclease which degrades
one strand. The DNA-translocase ComFA drives the
complementary strand into the cytosol through a channel
in the cytoplasmic membrane formed by ComEC. Reprinted
from Claverys et al. (2003), with permission from Elsevier.

an acceptable alternative. The term promiscuous
plasmids was originally coined for those plasmids
which are self-transmissible to a wide range of
other Gram-negative bacteria (see p. 185), where
they are stably maintained. The best examples are
the IncP alpha plasmids RP4, RP1, RK2, etc., which

Box 10.1 Transforming Bacillus subtilis with plasmid DNA
Although it is very easy to transform B. subtilis
with fragments of chromosomal DNA, there
are problems associated with transformation
by plasmid molecules. Ehrlich (1977) first
reported that competent cultures of B. subtilis
can be transformed with covalently closed
circular (CCC) plasmid DNA from
Staphylococcus aureus and that this plasmid
DNA is capable of autonomous replication and
expression in its new host. The development
of competence for transformation by plasmid
and chromosomal DNA follows a similar time
course and in both cases transformation is
first-order with respect to DNA concentration,
suggesting that a single DNA molecule is
sufficient for successful transformation
(Contente & Dubnau 1979). However,
transformation of B. subtilis with plasmid

DNA is very inefficient in comparison with
chromosomal transformation, for only one
transformant is obtained per 103–104 plasmid
molecules.
An explanation for the poor transformability
of plasmid DNA molecules was provided
by Canosi et al. (1978). They found that
the specific activity of plasmid DNA in the
transformation of B. subtilis was dependent on
the degree of oligomerization of the plasmid
genome. Purified monomeric CCC forms of
plasmids transform B. subtilis several orders
of magnitude less efficiently than do
unfractionated plasmid preparations or
multimers. Furthermore, the low residual
transforming activity of monomeric CCC
DNA molecules can be attributed to low-level
contamination with multimers (Mottes et al.
continued

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

Box 10.1
1979). Using a recombinant plasmid capable
of replication in both E. coli and B. subtilis
(pHV14) (see p. 192), Mottes et al. (1979)
were able to show that plasmid transformation
of E. coli occurs regardless of the degree of
oligomerization, in contrast to the situation
with B. subtilis. Oligomerization of linearized
plasmid DNA by DNA ligase resulted in a
substantial increase of specific transforming
activity when assayed with B. subtilis and
caused a decrease when used to transform
E. coli. An explanation of the molecular
events in transformation which generate the
requirement for oligomers has been presented
by De Vos et al. (1981). Basically, the plasmids
are cleaved into linear molecules upon contact
with competent cells, just as chromosomal
DNA is cleaved during transformation of
Bacillus. Once the linear single-stranded
form of the plasmid enters the cell, it is not
reproduced unless it can circularize; hence
the need for multimers to provide regions of
homology that can recombine. Michel et al.
(1982) have shown that multimers, or even
dimers, are not required, provided that part
of the plasmid genome is duplicated. They
constructed plasmids carrying direct internal
repeats 260–2000 bp long and found that
circular or linear monomers of such plasmids
were active in transformation.
Canosi et al. (1981) have shown that
plasmid monomers will transform
recombination-proficient B. subtilis if
they contain an insert of B. subtilis DNA.
However, the transformation efficiency of
such monomers is still considerably less than
that of oligomers. One consequence of the
requirement for plasmid oligomers for efficient
transformation of B. subtilis is that there have
been very few successes in obtaining large
numbers of clones in B. subtilis recipients
(Keggins et al. 1978, Michel et al. 1980). The
potential for generating multimers during
ligation of vector and foreign DNA is limited.
Transformation by plasmid rescue
An alternative strategy for transforming

181

continued
B. subtilis has been suggested by Gryczan
et al. (1980). If plasmid DNA is linearized
by restriction-endonuclease cleavage, no
transformation of B. subtilis results. However,
if the recipient carries a homologous plasmid
and if the restriction cut occurs within a
homologous marker, then this same marker
transforms efficiently. Since this rescue of donor
plasmid markers by a homologous resident
plasmid requires the B. subtilis recE gene
product, it must be due to recombination
between the linear donor DNA and the
resident plasmid. Since DNA linearized by
restriction-endonuclease cleavage at a
unique site is monomeric, this rescue system
(plasmid rescue) bypasses the requirement
for a multimeric vector. The model presented
by De Vos et al. (1981) to explain the
requirement for oligomers (see above) can be
adapted to account for transformation by
monomers by means of plasmid rescue. In
practice, foreign DNA is ligated to monomeric
vector DNA and the in vitro recombinants
are used to transform B. subtilis cells carrying
a homologous plasmid. Using such a
“plasmid-rescue” system, Gryczan et al.
(1980) were able to clone various genes
from B. licheniformis in B. subtilis.
One disadvantage of the plasmid-rescue
method is that transformants contain both
the recombinant molecule and the resident
plasmid. Incompatibility will result in
segregation of the two plasmids. This may
require several subculture steps, although
Haima et al. (1990) observed very rapid
segregation. Alternatively, the recombinant
plasmids can be transformed into plasmidfree cells.
Transformation of protoplasts
A third method for plasmid DNA transformation
in B. subtilis involves polyethylene glycol (PEG)
induction of DNA uptake in protoplasts and
subsequent regeneration of the bacterial cell
wall (Chang & Cohen 1979). The procedure
is highly efficient and yields up to 80%
transformants, making the method suitable
continued

182

CHAPTER 10

Box 10.1

continued

for the introduction even of cryptic plasmids.
In addition to its much higher yield of
plasmid-containing transformants, the
protoplast transformation system differs in
two respects from the “traditional” system
using physiologically competent cells. First,
linear plasmid DNA and non-supercoiled
circular plasmid DNA molecules constructed
by ligation in vitro can be introduced at high
efficiency into B. subtilis by the protoplast
transformation system, albeit at a frequency
10–1000 lower than the frequency observed
for CCC plasmid DNA. However, the
efficiency of shotgun cloning is much lower

with protoplasts than with competent
cells (Haima et al. 1988). Secondly, while
competent cells can be transformed easily
for genetic determinants located on the
B. subtilis chromosome, no detectable
transformation with chromosomal DNA is
seen using the protoplast assay. Until recently,
a disadvantage of the protoplast system
was that the regeneration medium was
nutritionally complex, necessitating a
two-step selection procedure for auxotrophic
markers. Details have been presented of a
defined regeneration medium by Puyet et al.
(1987).

Table B10.1 Comparison of the different methods of transforming B. subtilis.

System

Efficiency
(transformants/mg DNA)

Advantages

Disadvantages

Competent
cells

Unfractionated plasmid
Linear
CCC monomer
CCC dimer
CCC multimer

2 × 104
0
4 × 104
8 × 103
2.6 × 105

Competent cells readily
prepared
Transformants can be
selected readily on any
medium
Recipient can be Rec−

Requires plasmid
oligomers or internally
duplicated plasmids,
which makes shotgun
experiments difficult
unless high DNA
concentrations and high
vector/donor DNA
ratios are used
Not possible to use
phosphatase-treated
vector

Plasmid rescue

Unfractionated plasmid

2 × 106

Oligomers not required
Can transform with
linear DNA
Transformants can be
selected on any
medium

Transformants contain
resident plasmid and
incoming plasmid and
these have to be
separated by
segregation or
retransformation
Recipient must be Rec+

Protoplasts

Unfractionated plasmid
Linear
CCC monomer
CCC dimer
CCC multimer

3.8 × 106
2 × 104
3 × 106
2 × 106
2 × 106

Most efficient system
Gives up to 80%
transformants
Does not require
competent cells
Can transform with
linear DNA and can use
phosphatase-treated
vector

Efficiency lower with
molecules which have
been cut and religated
Efficiency also very
size-dependent, and
declines steeply as size
increases

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

are about 60 kb in size, but the IncW plasmid Sa
(29.6 kb) has been used extensively in Agrobacterium
tumefaciens. Self-transmissible plasmids carry tra
(transfer) genes encoding the conjugative apparatus.
IncP plasmids are able to promote the transfer of
other compatible plasmids, as well as themselves. For
example, they can mobilize IncQ plasmids, such as
RSF1010. More important, transfer can be mediated
between E. coli and Gram-positive bacteria (TrieuCuot et al. 1987, Gormley & Davies 1991), as well
as to yeasts and fungi (Heinemann & Sprague 1989,
Hayman & Bolen 1993, Bates et al. 1998). However, the transfer range of a plasmid may be greater
than its replication maintenance or host range
(Mazodier & Davies 1991).
Self-transmissible plasmids have been identified
in many different Gram-positive genera. The transfer
regions of these plasmids are much smaller than
those for plasmids from Gram-negative bacteria. One
reason for this difference may be the much simpler
cell-wall structure in Gram-positive bacteria. As
well as being self-transmissible, many of these Grampositive plasmids are promiscuous. For example,
plasmid pAMβ1 was originally isolated from Enterococcus faecalis but can transfer to staphylococci,
streptococci, bacilli, and lactic acid bacteria (De Vos
et al. 1997), as well as to Gram-negative bacteria,
such as E. coli (Trieu-Cuot et al. 1988). The selftransmissible plasmids of Gram-positive bacteria, like
their counterparts in the Gram-negative bacteria,
can also mobilize other plasmids between different
genera (Projan & Archer 1989, Charpentier et al.
1999). Non-self-transmissible plasmids can also be
mobilized within and between genera by conjugative transposons (Salyers et al. 1995, Charpentier
et al. 1999).
It should be noted that conjugation is not a
replacement for transformation or electroporation. If
DNA is manipulated in vitro, then it has to be transferred into a host cell at some stage. In many cases,
this will be E. coli and transformation is a suitable
procedure. Once in E. coli, or any other organism
for that matter, it may be moved to other bacteria
directly by conjugation, as an alternative to purifying the DNA and moving it by transformation or
electroporation.
Recombinant DNA needs to replicate or be
integrated into the chromosome in new hosts
For recombinant DNA to be maintained in a new
host cell, either it must be capable of replication or it

183

must integrate into the chromosome or a plasmid. In
most instances, the recombinant will be introduced
as a covalently closed circle (CCC) plasmid and maintenance will depend on the host range of the plasmid.
As noted in Chapter 4 (p. 57), the host range of
a plasmid is dependent on the number of encoded
proteins required for its replication. Some plasmids
have a very narrow host range, whereas others can
be maintained in a wide range of Gram-negative or
Gram-positive genera. Some, such as the plasmids
from Staphylococcus aureus and RSF1010, can
replicate in both Gram-negative and Grampositive
species (Lacks et al. 1986, Gormley & Davies 1991,
Leenhouts et al. 1991).
As noted in Chapter 5, there is a very wide range of
specialist vectors for use in E. coli. However, most of
these vectors have a very narrow host range and can
be maintained only in enteric bacteria. A common
way of extending the host range of these vectors is to
form hybrids with plasmids from the target species.
The first such shuttle vectors to be described were
fusions between the E. coli vector pBR322 and the
S. aureus/B. subtilis plasmids pC194 and pUB110
(Ehrlich 1978). The advantage of shuttle plasmids
is that E. coli can be used as an efficient intermediate
host for cloning. This is particularly important if
transformation or electroporation of the alternative
host is very inefficient.
Recombinant DNA can integrate into the
chromosome in different ways
When a recombinant plasmid is transferred to an
unrelated host cell, there are a number of possible
outcomes:
•
•
•
•

It may be stably maintained as a plasmid.
It may be lost.
It may integrate into another replicon, usually
the chromosome.
A gene on the plasmid may recombine with a
homologous gene elsewhere in the cell.

Under normal circumstances, a plasmid will be
maintained if it can replicate in the new host and
will be lost if it cannot. Plasmids which will be lost in
their new host are particularly useful for delivering
transposons (Saint et al. 1995, Maguin et al. 1996).
If the plasmid carries a cloned insert with homology
to a region of the chromosome, then the outcome
is quite different. The homologous region may be
excised and incorporated into the chromosome by

184

CHAPTER 10

ApR

BamHI BamHI

Bgl II

BglII

CmR

BglII

BglII

Recombination

BamHI

BamHI
CmR

BglII

ApR

Bgl II

BglII
Removal by BglII digestion
followed by ligation
BglII
BamHI

BamHI
CmR

ApR

the normal recombination process, i.e. substitution
occurs via a double crossover event. If only a single
crossover occurs, the entire recombinant plasmid is
integrated into the chromosome.
It is possible to favor integration by transferring a
plasmid into a host in which it cannot replicate and
selecting for a plasmid-borne marker. For example,
Stoss et al. (1997) have constructed an integrative
vector by cloning a neomycin resistance gene and
part of the amyE (alpha amylase) gene of B. subtilis
in plasmid pBR322. When this plasmid is transferred to B. subtilis, it is unable to replicate, but, if
selection is made for neomycin resistance, then
integration of the plasmid occurs at the amyE locus
(Fig. 10.2). This technique is particularly useful if
one wishes to construct a recombinant carrying a
single copy of a foreign gene. However, integrated
plasmids tend to be unstable unless selective pressure is maintained.
Once a recombinant plasmid has integrated into
the chromosome, it is relatively easy to clone adjacent sequences. Suppose, for example, that a vector

Fig. 10.2 Cloning DNA
sequences flanking the site
of insertion. The purple bar
on the plasmid represents a
BamHI fragment of B. subtilis
chromosomal DNA carrying the
amyE gene. Note that the plasmid
has no BglII sites. (See text for
details.)

carrying B. subtilis DNA in the BamHI site (Fig. 10.2)
has recombined into the chromosome. If the recombinant plasmid has no BglII sites, it can be recovered
by digesting the chromosomal DNA with BglII, ligating the resulting fragments, and transforming E. coli
to ApR. However, the plasmid which is isolated will
be larger than the original one, because DNA flanking the site of insertion will also have been cloned.
In this way, Niaudet et al. (1982) used a plasmid
carrying a portion of the B. subtilis ilvA gene to clone
the adjacent thyA gene.
Genes cloned into a plasmid and flanked by regions
homologous to the chromosome can also integrate
without tandem duplication of the chromosomal
segments. In this case, the plasmid DNA is linearized
before transformation, as shown in Fig. 10.3. The
same technique can be used to generate deletions.
The gene of interest is cloned, a portion of the gene
replaced in vitro with a fragment bearing an antibiotic marker and the linearized plasmid transformed
into B. subtilis, with selection made for antibiotic
resistance.

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

Km

Bgl II

l

M15
Z∆
ac

R

P

B

C

BglII

A D
PstI
Cut with PstI and transform
with selection for KmR

Z
lac

A

B

C

D

A

B

C

D

Bgl II

(see Chapter 5) which already exist, e.g. expression
vectors, secretion vectors, etc. (for reviews, see
Schweizer 2001 and Davison 2002). If the selectable
markers are not expressed in the new host, then
extensive manipulations may be necessary just to
enable transformants to be detected.
With broad-host-range plasmids, there is a high
probability that the selectable markers will be expressed in the new host and confirming that this is
indeed the case is easy to do. However, the naturally
occurring plasmids do not fulfil all the criteria for an
ideal vector, which are:
•
•
•

∆M
15 P

Km

PstI

R

PstI

185

small size;
having multiple selectable markers;
having unique sites for a large number of restriction enzymes, preferably in genes with readily
scorable phenotypes.

Plasmid
Chromosome

Fig. 10.3 Insertion of plasmid DNA into the chromosome
by a double crossover event. The B. subtilis DNA is shown in
gray and the letters A to D represent different chromosomal
sequences. Vector DNA is shown in white and other vectorborne genes in purple.

Cloning in Gram-negative bacteria other
than E. coli
To clone DNA in non-enteric bacteria, a plasmid
cloning vehicle is required which can replicate in the
selected organism(s). Under normal circumstances,
E. coli will be used as an intermediate host for transformation of the ligation mix and screening for
recombinant plasmids. Therefore, the vector must
be able to replicate in E. coli as well. The options
which are available are to generate a shuttle vector
or to use a broad-host-range plasmid as a vector. If
a small plasmid can be isolated from the bacterium
of interest, then it is easy to splice it into an existing
E. coli vector to generate a shuttle vector. Recent
examples of this approach are the construction of
vectors for use in Pasteurella (Bills et al. 1993),
Desulfovibrio (Rousset et al. 1998), and Thermus
(De Grado et al. 1999). This approach is particularly
useful if the selectable markers used in E. coli
also function in the new host. Then one can take
advantage of the many different specialist vectors

Consequently the natural plasmids have been extensively modified, but few approach the degree of
sophistication found in the standard E. coli vectors.
Vectors derived from the IncQ-group plasmid
RSF1010 are not self-transmissible
Plasmid RSF1010 is a multicopy replicon which
specifies resistance to two antimicrobial agents, sulfonamide and streptomycin. The plasmid DNA, which
is 8684 bp long, has been completely sequenced
(Scholz et al. 1989). A detailed physical and functional map has been constructed (Bagdasarian et al.
1981, Scherzinger et al. 1984). The features mapped
are the restriction-endonuclease recognition sites,
RNA polymerase binding sites, resistance determinants, genes for plasmid mobilization (mob), three
replication proteins (Rep A, B, and C), and the origins
of vegetative (ori) and transfer (nic) replication.
Plasmid RSF1010 has unique cleavage sites for
EcoRI, BstEII, HpaI, DraII, NsiI, and SacI and, from the
nucleotide sequence data, is predicted to have unique
sites for AfIIII, BanII, NotI, SacII, SfiI, and SplI. There
are two PstI sites, about 750 bp apart, which flank
the sulfonamide-resistance determinant (Fig. 10.4).
None of the unique cleavage sites is located within the
antibiotic-resistance determinants and none is particularly useful for cloning. Before the BstEII, EcoRI,
and PstI sites can be used, another selective marker
must be introduced into the RSF1010 genome. This
need arises because the SmR and SuR genes are transcribed from the same promoter (Bagdasarian et al.
1981). Insertion of a DNA fragment between the PstI

186

CHAPTER 10

HpaI
PstI

Mini-versions of the IncP-group plasmids
have been developed as conjugative
broad-host-range vectors

EcoRI

PstI
BstEII

SmR

SuR
0
8
7

A

B

1
2

RSF 1010
(8.68 kb)

6

3
5
C

ori

4
mob

Fig. 10.4 The structure of plasmid RSFI010. The gray
tinted areas show the positions of the SmR and SuR genes.
The region marked ori indicates the location of the origin of
replication. The mob function is required for conjugal
mobilization by a compatible self-transmissible plasmid.
A, B, and C are the regions encoding the three replication
proteins.

sites inactivates both resistance determinants.
Although the EcoRI and BstEII sites lie outside the
coding regions of the SmR gene, streptomycin
resistance is lost if a DNA fragment is inserted at
these sites unless the fragment provides a new promoter. Furthermore, the SuR determinant which
remains is a poor selective marker.
A whole series of improved vectors has been
derived from RSF1010 but only a few are mentioned
here. The earliest vectors contained additional unique
cleavage sites and more useful antibiotic-resistance
determinants. For example, plasmids KT230 and
KT231 encode KmR and SmR and have unique sites
for HindIII, XmaI, XhoRI, and SstI which can be used
for insertional inactivation. These two vectors have
been used to clone (in P. putida) genes involved in
the catabolism of aromatic compounds (Franklin
et al. 1981). Vectors for the regulated expression of
cloned genes have also been described. Some of these
make use of the tac promoter (Bagdasarian et al.
1983, Deretic et al. 1987) or the phage T7 promoter
(Davison et al. 1989), which will function in P. putida
as well as E. coli. Another makes use of positively
activated twin promoters from a plasmid specifying
catabolism of toluene and xylenes (Mermod et al.
1986). Expression of cloned genes can be obtained in
a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria following
induction with micromolar quantities of benzoate,
and the product of the cloned gene can account for
5% of total cell protein.

Both the IncP alpha plasmids (R18, R68, RK2, RP1
and RP4), which are 60 kb in size, and the smaller
(52 kb) IncP beta plasmid R751 have been completely sequenced (Pansegrau et al. 1994, Thorsted
et al. 1998). As a result, much is known about the
genes carried, the location of restriction sites, etc.
Despite this, the P-group plasmids are not widely
used as vectors because their large size makes manipulations difficult.
A number of groups have developed mini-IncP
plasmids as vectors and good examples are those
of Blatny et al. (1997). Their vectors are only 4.8–
7.1 kb in size but can still be maintained in a wide
range of Gram-negative bacteria. All the vectors
share a common polylinker and lacZ′ region, thereby
simplifying cloning procedures and identification
of inserts by blue/white screening (see p. 45) and
most carry two antibiotic-resistance determinants.
All the vectors retain the oriT (origin of transfer)
locus, enabling them to be conjugally transferred
in those cases where the recipient cannot be successfully transformed or electroporated. Two other
features of these vectors deserve mention. First, the
parDE and parCBA operons from the parent plasmid
have been incorporated in some of the vectors since
these greatly enhance segregative stability in many
hosts. Secondly, the trfA locus on the vector contains unique sites for the restriction enzymes NdeI
and SfiI. Removal of the NdeI–SfiI fragment results in
an increased copy number. Expression vectors have
also been developed by the inclusion of controllable
promoters. Representative examples of these vectors
are shown in Fig. 10.5.
An alternative way of using P-group plasmids
as cloning vectors has been described by Kok et al.
(1994). Their method combines the advantages of
high-copy-number pBR322 vectors with the convenience of conjugative plasmids. This is achieved
by converting the pBR322 vector into a transposable element. Most pBR322 derivatives contain
the β-lactamase gene and one of two 38 bp inverted
repeats of transposon Tn2. By adding a second
inverted repeat, a transposable element is created
(Fig. 10.6). All that is missing is transposase activity
and this is provided by another plasmid, which is
a pSC101 derivative carrying the tnpA gene. To use
this system, the desired DNA sequence is cloned into
the transposition vector. The recombinant molecules

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

187

AccI
PvuII

AccI

PvuII

PvuII
PvuII

PvuII

PvuII

tetR

PvuII
lacZ’

SmaI
XmaI

lacZ’

NdeI

tetA

cat
pJB3Tc20
7069 bp

NdeI

pJB3Cm6
6227 bp

trfA

oriT

PvuII

trfA

oriT

AccI

SfiI
Pneo

bla

oriV

PvuII

AccI
SalI

AccI

SfiI

bla

Pneo

oriV

PvuII
AccI
SalI
PstI
PvuII

SmaI
XmaI
HindIII

PvuII
lacZ’

kan

pJB3Km1
6052 bp

lacZ’ parDE

PstI
AccI
SalI

NdeI
trfA

PvuII
PvuII

oriT

BgIII
AccI
NdeI

NdeI
trfA

AccI

pJB321
5594 bp

oriT

AccI

bla

SfiI
Pneo

bla

SfiI

oriV

Pneo oriV

PvuII

PvuII

Fig. 10.5 Map and construction of general-purpose broad-host-range cloning vectors derived from plasmid RP4. The restriction
sites in the polylinker downstream of the lacZ promoter are marked (t), and the sites are, in the counterclockwise direction,
HindIII, SphI, PstI, SalI/HincII/AccI, XbaI, BamHI, XmaI/SmaI, KpnI, SacI, and EcoRI. Sites in the polylinker that are not unique are
indicated elsewhere on each vector. Note that the sites for NdeI and SfiI are unique for all of the vectors except pJB321. Pneo,
promoter from the neomycin resistance gene; bla, kan, tet, and cat, genes encoding ampicillin, kanamycin, tetracycline, and
chloramphenicol resistance, respectively. (Figure modified from Blatny et al. 1997.)

HII
Bss RV
Eco I
a

Hp

lacI

lacZ’

aI
Hp oRI
Ec

lacPO

I

Ap

pH

Bs

pH

Bs

I

ScaI

I
Nae

are transformed into an E. coli strain carrying the
P-group plasmid (e.g. R751) and the pSC101 tnpA
derivative and selection is made for the desired characteristics. Once a suitable transformant has been
selected, it is conjugated with other Gram-negative
bacteria and selection made for the ampicillinresistance marker carried on the transposon.
Vectors derived from the broad-host-range
plasmid Sa are used mostly with Agrobacterium
tumefaciens

pSPORTn3
ri
F1 o

BspMI
Sse8387I
PstI
KpnI
AgeI
RsrII
BspEII
EcoRI
SmaI
SalI
SacI
SpeI
NotI
XbaI
BamHI
HindIII
SnaBI
SplI
SphI
AatII

Fig. 10.6 A transposable vector derived from pBR322.
The solid arrowheads indicate the inverted repeats required
for transposition. Insertion of a DNA fragment in the
multiple-cloning site results in inactivation of the lacZ′
gene and regulated gene expression from the wild-type lac
promoter.

Although a group-W plasmid, such as plasmid pSa
(Fig. 10.7) can infect a wide range of Gram-negative
bacteria, it has been developed mainly as a vector
for use with the oncogenic bacterium A. tumefaciens
(see p. 277). Two regions have been identified as
involved in conjugal transfer of the plasmid and one
of them has the unexpected property of suppressing
oncogenicity by A. tumefaciens (Tait et al. 1982).
Information encoding the replication of the plasmid

188

CHAPTER 10

SstII

BglII

cassette from E. coli (see p. 86) and shown that the
promoter is controllable in Agrobacterium. Sukchawalit
et al. (1999), using a similar vector, have shown that
the promoter is also controllable in Xanthomonas.

0
25

5

Cloned DNA can be shuttled between highcopy-number and low-copy-number vectors

pSa
(29.6 kb)
20

10

R

Km

15

Sm
R

Su R

EcoRI

SstII

BglII EcoRI

R

Cm

SalI
SstII
BglII

SmaI

Fig. 10.7 The structure of plasmid Sa. The gray area
encodes the functions essential for plasmid replication. The
dark purple areas represent the regions containing functions
essential for self-transmission, the one between the SstII and
SalI sites being responsible for suppression of tumor induction
by Agrobacterium tumefaciens.

in E. coli and A. tumefaciens is contained within a 4
kb DNA fragment. Leemans et al. (1982b) have
described four small (5.6–7.2 MDa), multiply
marked derivatives of pSa. The derivatives contain single target sites for a number of the common
restriction endonucleases and at least one marker in
each is subject to insertional inactivation. Although
these Sa derivatives are non-conjugative, they can
be mobilized by other conjugative plasmids. Tait et al.
(1983) have also constructed a set of broad-hostrange vectors from pSa. The properties of their derivatives are similar to those of Leemans et al. (1982b),
but one of them also contains the bacteriophage λ cos
sequence and hence functions as a cosmid. Specialist vectors for use in Agrobacterium and which are
derived from a natural Agrobacterium plasmid have
been described by Gallie et al. (1988).
pBBR1 is another plasmid that has been
used to develop broad-host-range
cloning vectors
Plasmid BBR1 is a broad-host-range plasmid originally isolated from Bordatella bronchiseptica that is
compatible with IncP, IncQ, and IncW plasmids and
replicates in a wide range of bacteria. Kovach et al.
(1995) have developed a series of vectors from pBBR1
that are relatively small (<5.3 kb), possess multiple
cloning sites, allow direct selection of recombinants
in E. coli by blue/white screening, and are mobilizable by IncP plasmids. Newman & Fuqua (1999)
have developed an expression vector from one of these
pBBR1 derivatives by incorporating the araBAD/araC

Ouimet & Marczynski (2000) have described an
elegant method for the transfer of cloned DNA from
a high-copy-number E. coli vector to a low-copynumber vector by in vivo DNA shuttling (Fig. 10.8).
A transcriptional gene fusion to a promoterless
β-galactosidase gene (′lacZ) is constructed using an
E. coli vector derived from ColE1 that encodes ampicillin resistance. This recombinant plasmid is then
transferred to a second, recombination-proficient
strain containing a promiscuous low-copy-number
vector (e.g. one derived from RK2) and a helper
plasmid. The promiscuous vector carries sequences
homologous to the ColE1 vector, a gene encoding
tetracycline resistance, and the sacB-npt gene cluster
that confers sensitivity to sucrose and resistance
to kanamycin. The helper plasmid encodes spectinomycin and streptomycin resistance as well as the
RNA1 antisense RNA that inhibits ColE1 replication
(see p. 57). When the recipient is plated on medium
containing sucrose and tetracycline selection is made
for cells in which a double crossover has occurred.
The sacB-nrt gene cluster is removed and replaced
with the original gene fusion. Such cells should be
both ampicillin and kanamycin sensitive and the
plasmid that they contain can be conjugated into
other recipients, e.g. Pseudomonas species.
Proper transcriptional analysis of a cloned
gene requires that it is present on the
chromosome
Whole-genome sequencing has identified many
genes of unknown function. Fusion of such genes
to reporter genes such as β-galactosidase and luciferase can be very useful for initial transcriptional
studies and many specialist vectors are available
for this purpose. However, such plasmid systems
suffer from a number of inherent problems. For
example, high-copy-number vectors may be useful
for identification of weak promoters but do not reflect
the natural situation, and titration effects involving
single-copy, chromosomally encoded transcriptional
regulators may lead to improperly regulated gene
expression. Furthermore, genomic DNA and plasmid DNA differ in their extent of supercoiling, which

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

189

E. coli
Helper
Sp/St

RNA1
Blocks ColE1 replication

ColE1

Fig. 10.8 In vivo
transfer of cloned DNA
from a high-copy vector
to a low-copy vector.
See text for details.
Abbreviations: Sp,
spectinomycin
resistance; St,
streptomycin
resistance; Ap,
ampicillin resistance;
Tc, tetracycline
resistance; Km,
kanamycin resistance;
Suc, sensitivity to
sucrose; P, promoter
under investigation.
Reprinted from
Schweizer (2001), with
permission from
Elsevier.

’lacZ

High copy
Ap

’lacZ

Low copy
Tc (Km, Suc)

P

sacB-npt
RK2

Conjugation

Pseudomonas

’lacZ
RK2

is known to play a major role in regulating gene
expression. Chromosomal integration is the best
way of circumventing such problems. One way of
achieving this is integration of non-replicative plasmids but, as noted earlier (p. 184), selective pressure
needs to be maintained. An alternative strategy is to
replace the existing gene with the desired gene
fusion but this is not suitable for the analysis of
essential genes. Ideally, the reporter gene fusion
should be integrated at a neutral site and this has
been achieved in Pseudomonas aeruginosa using novel
integrative vectors (Hoang et al. 2000, Becher &
Schweizer 2000).
The integrative vectors for P. aeruginosa consist
of a number of key elements (Fig. 10.9). These are
the pMB1-derived origin of replication, a selectable marker (tetracycline resistance), an oriT for
conjugation-mediated plasmid transfer from E. coli,
the attachment site for Pseudomonas phage ΦCTX,
the ΦCTX integrase gene, and a multiple cloning site
(MCS) flanked by phage T4 transcription termination sequences. Following transfer of the integrative
vector from E. coli to P. aeruginosa the plasmidencoded integrase facilitates insertion at the chro-

Low copy
Tc

P

mosomal attachment site for ΦCTX. If a gene was
inserted at the MCS in the vector then a single
copy now will be present at a neutral site (attΦCTX)
on the P. aeruginosa chromosome. As an additional
feature, the MCS and termination sequences in the
vector are flanked by Flp recombinase target sites
(FRT). These enable unwanted plasmid backbone
sequences to be removed in vivo (see Box 3.3). To
achieve this it is necessary to transfer a second
plasmid to the P. aeruginosa recepient that encodes
the gene for Flp recombinase.

Cloning in Gram-positive bacteria
In Gram-positive bacteria, the base composition of
the different genomes ranges from <30% GC to
>70% GC. Given this disparity in GC content, the
preferred codons and regulatory signals used by
organisms at one end of the % GC spectrum will not
be recognized by organisms at the other end. This
in turn means that there are no universal cloning
vehicles for use with all Gram-positive bacteria.
Rather, one set of systems has been developed for

190

CHAPTER 10

(b)

(a)

attB

Chromosome

1.

MCS

2.

’luxCDABE

FRT

MCS

’lacZ

X

Ω

int

ori
Plac

FRT

attP

oriT

3.
lacl

Ω

tet

T7 pol
Integrase

4.
laclq

Plac

tet

attB”P

lacZ∆M15

int

attB”P

FRT
MCS
FRT

Ω

FRT

X

Ω

Ω

attP

∆
Ω

Flp recombinase
attP

FRT
attB”P

oriT
ori

int

attB”P

tet
FRT

Ω

X

Ω

Vector

Fig. 10.9 Integration vectors for use in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. (a) Maps of various integration vectors containing the
indicated genetic elements and (b) an illustration of the integrase-mediated chromosomal integration of genes. The four
cassettes allow construction of host strains for regulated expression from the lac-based and T7 promoters and enable the
construction of transcriptional fusions to a promoterless lacZ gene or lux operon. The locations of genes and their transcriptional
orientations are shown, including the T4 transcription terminators (Ω). Abbreviations: attB, chromosomal φCTX attachment
site; attP, φCTX attachment site; FRT, Flp recombinase target site; int, φCTX integrase-encoding gene; lacA, E. coli lacI gene with
promoter-up mutation; Plac, E. coli lac operon promoter; lacZ∆M15, E. coli β-galactosidase gene containing the in-frame M15
deletion; MCS, multiple cloning site; ori, ColE1 origin of replication; oriT, origin of transfer; T7 pol, phage T7 polymerase-encoding
gene; tet, tetracycline resistance encoding gene. Integration of a genetic element (X) at the chromosomal attB locus and removal of
unwanted plasmid sequences involves two steps: Integrase-mediated integration of the non-replicative plasmid, which is selected
by tetracycline resistance, and introduction of an Flp-recombinase-encoding plasmid, followed by screening for loss of tetracycline
resistance and curing of the Flp-encoding plasmid. Reprinted from Schweizer (2001), with permission from Elsevier.

high-GC organisms (e.g. streptomycetes) and another
for low-GC organisms. This latter group comprises
bacteria from the unrelated genera Bacillus, Clostridium, and Staphylococcus and the lactic acid bacteria
Streptococcus, Lactococcus, and Lactobacillus.
Many of the cloning vectors used with
Bacillus subtilis and other low-GC bacteria
are derived from plasmids found in
Staphylococcus aureus
The development of B. subtilis vectors began with
the observation (Ehrlich 1977) that plasmids from

S. aureus (Table 10.1) can be transformed into B.
subtilis, where they replicate and express antibiotic
resistance normally.
As can be seen from Table 10.1, none of the
natural S. aureus plasmids carries more than one
selectable marker and so improved vectors have
been constructed by gene manipulation, e.g. pHV11
is pC194 carrying the TcR gene of pT127 (Ehrlich
1978). In general, these plasmids are stable in B.
subtilis, but segregative stability is greatly reduced
following insertion of exogenous DNA (Bron & Luxen
1985). Reasoning that stable host–vector systems
in B. subtilis are more likely if endogenous plasmids

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

191

Table 10.1 Properties of some S. aureus plasmids used as vectors in B. subtilis.

Plasmid

Phenotype conferred
on host cell

Size

Copy no.

Other comments

pC194

Chloramphenicol
resistance

2906 bp

15

Generates large amount of high-molecularweight DNA when carrying heterologous
inserts

pE194

Erythromycin resistance

3728 bp

10

cop-6 derivative has copy number of 100
Plasmid is naturally temperature-sensitive
for replication

pUB110

Kanamycin resistance

4548 bp

50

Virtually the complete sequence is involved
in replication maintenance, site-specific
plasmid recombination or conjugal transfer

are used, Bron and colleagues have developed the
cryptic Bacillus plasmid pTA1060 as a vector
(Haima et al. 1987, Bron et al. 1989).
Because of the difficulties experienced in direct
cloning in B. subtilis, hybrid plasmids were constructed which can replicate in both E. coli and
B. subtilis. Originally most of these were constructed
as fusions between pBR322 and pC194 or pUB110.
With such plasmids, E. coli can be used as an efficient
intermediate host for cloning. Plasmid preparations
extracted from E. coli clones are subsequently used
to transform competent B. subtilis cells. Such preparations contain sufficient amounts of multimeric
plasmid molecules to be efficient in B. subtiliscompetent cell transformation (see p. 180).
Table 10.2 lists some of the commonly used shuttle
plasmids. Note that some of them carry some of the
features described earlier for E. coli plasmids, e.g.
the E. coli lacZα-complementation fragment, multiple
cloning sites (MCS) (see p. 65), and the phage f1
origin for subsequent production of single-stranded
DNA in a suitable E. coli host (see p. 81).
The mode of plasmid replication can affect
the stability of cloning vectors in B. subtilis
Early in the development of B. subtilis cloning vectors,
it was noted that only short DNA fragments could
be efficiently cloned (Michel et al. 1980) and that
longer DNA segments often undergo rearrangements
(Ehrlich et al. 1986). This structural instability is
independent of the host recombination systems, for it
still occurs in Rec− strains (Peijnenburg et al. 1987).
A major contributing factor to structural instability of recombinant DNA in B. subtilis appears

to be the mode of replication of the plasmid vector
(Gruss & Ehrlich 1989, Jannière et al. 1990). All
the B. subtilis vectors described above replicate by
a rolling-circle mechanism (see Box 10.2). Nearly
every step in the process digresses or could digress
from its usual function, thus effecting rearrangements. Also, single-stranded DNA is known to be a
reactive intermediate in every recombination process, and single-stranded DNA is generated during
rolling-circle replication.
If structural instability is a consequence of rollingcircle replication, then vectors which replicate by the
alternative theta mechanism could be more stable.
Jannière et al. (1990) have studied two potentially
useful plasmids, pAMβ1 and pTB19, which are large
(26.5 kb) natural plasmids derived from Streptococcus
(Enterococcus) faecalis and B. subtilis, respectively.
Replication of these plasmids does not lead to accumulation of detectable amounts of single-stranded
DNA, whereas the rolling-circle mode of replication does. Also, the replication regions of these two
large plasmids share no sequence homology with
the corresponding highly conserved regions of the
rolling-circle-type plasmids. It is worth noting that
the classical E. coli vectors, which are derived from
plasmid ColE1, all replicate via theta-like structures.
Renault et al. (1996) have developed a series of
cloning vectors from pAMβ1. All the vectors carry a
gene essential for replication, repE, and its regulator,
copF. The latter gene can be inactivated by inserting
a linker into its unique KpnI site. Since copF downregulates the expression of repE, its inactivation
leads to an increase in the plasmid copy number
per cell. The original low-copy-number state can be
restored by removal of the linker by cleavage and

192

CHAPTER 10

Table 10.2 B. subtilis–E. coli shuttle plasmids.

Replicon
Plasmid

B. subtilis

Markers

Size (kbp)

E. coli

E. coli

B. subtilis

Comments

pHV14

4.6

pBR322

pC194

Ap, Cm

Cm

pBR322/pC194 fusion. Sites: PstI,
BamHI, SalI, NcoI (Ehrlich 1978)

pHV15

4.6

pBR322

pC194

Ap, Cm

Cm

pHV14, reversed orientation of
pC194 relative to pBR322

pHV33

4.6

pBR322

pC194

Ap, Tc, Cm

Cm

Revertant of pHV14 (Primrose &
Ehrlich 1981)

pEB10

8.9

pBR322

pUB110

Ap, Km

Km

pBR322/pUB110 fusion
(Bron et al. 1988)

pLB5

5.8

pBR322

pUB110

Ap, Cm, Km

Cm, Km

Deletion of pBR322/pUB110
fusion, CmR gene of pCl94
Segregationally unstable
(Bron & Luxen 1985). Sites:
BamHI, EcoRI, BqlIII (in KmR gene),
NcoI (in CmR gene)

pHP3

4.8

pBR322

pTA1060

Em, Cm

Em, Cm

Segregationally stable pTA1060
replicon (Peeters et al. 1988).
Copy number c. 5. Sites: NcoI
(CmR gene), BclI and HpaI
(both EmR gene)

pHP3Ff

5.3

pBR322

pTA1060

Em, Cm

Em, Cm

Like pHP3; phage f1 replication
origin and packaging signal

pGPA14

5.8

pBR322

pTA1060

Em

Em

Stable pTA1060 replicon. Copy
number c. 5. a-Amylase-based
selection vector for protein export
functions (Smith et al. 1987).
MCS of M13mp11 in lacZa

pGPB14

5.7

pBR322

pTA1060

Em

Em

As pGPA14, probe gene
TEM-b-lactamase

pHP13

4.9

pBR322

pTA1060

Em, Cm

Em, Cm

Stable pTA1060 replicon. Copy
number c. 5. Efficient (shotgun)
cloning vector (Haima et al.
1987). MCS of M13mp9 in lacZa
LacZa not expressed in B. subtilis.
Additional sites: BclI and HpaI
(both EmR gene)

pHV1431

10.9

pBR322

pAMb1

Ap, Tc, Cm

Cm

Efficient cloning vector based on
segregationally stable pAMb1
( Jannière et al. 1990). Copy
number c. 200. Sites: BgmHI,
SalI, PstI, NcoI. Structurally
unstable in E. coli

pHV1432

8.8

pBR322

pAMb1

Ap, Tc, Cm

Cm

pHV1431 lacking stability
fragment orfH. Structurally
stable in E. coli

pHV1436

8.2

pBR322

pTB19

Ap, Tc, Cm

Cm

Low-copy-number cloning vector
(Jannière et al. 1990) Structurally
stable

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

193

Box 10.2 The two modes of replication of circular DNA molecules
There are two modes of replication of circular
DNA molecules: via theta-like structures
or by a rolling-circle type of mechanism.
Visualization by electron microscopy of the
replicating intermediates of many circular
DNA molecules reveals that they retain a ring
structure throughout replication. They always
possess a theta-like shape that comes into
existence by the initiation of a replicating
bubble at the origin of replication (Fig. B10.1).
Replication can proceed either uni- or
bidirectionally. As long as each chain remains
intact, even minor untwisting of a section of
the circular double helix results in the creation
of positive supercoils in the other direction.
This supercoiling is relaxed by the action of
topoisomerases (see Fig. 4.1), which create
single-stranded breaks (relaxed molecules)
and then reseal them.

An alternative way to replicate circular
DNA is the rolling-circle mechanism
(Fig. B10.2). DNA synthesis starts with a
cut in one strand at the origin of replication.
The 5′ end of the cut strand is displaced
from the duplex, permitting the addition of
deoxyribonucleotides at the free 3′ end.
As replication proceeds, the 5′ end of the
cut strand is rolled out as a free tail of
increasing length. When a full-length tail is
produced, the replicating machinery cuts it
off and ligates the two ends together. The
double-stranded progeny can reinitiate
replication, whereas the single-stranded
progeny must first be converted to a doublestranded form. Gruss & Ehrlich (1989) have
suggested how deletants and defective
molecules can be produced at each step in
the rolling-circle process.

ori

5‘

5‘

+

5‘

Fig. B10.1 Theta replication of a circular DNA
molecule. The original DNA is shown in black and the
newly synthesized DNA in purple. • represents the origin
of replication and the arrow shows the direction of leading
strand replication.

Fig. B10.2 Rolling-circle replication of a circular DNA
molecule. The original DNA is shown in black and the
newly synthesized DNA in purple. The solid and open
circles represent the positions of the replication origins
of the outer (+) and inner (−) circles, respectively.

194

CHAPTER 10

religation. This new replicon has been used to build
vectors for making transcriptional and translational
fusions and for expression of native proteins. Poyart
and Trieu-Cuot (1997) have constructed a shuttle
vector based on pAMβ1 for the construction of transcriptional fusions; it can be conjugally transferred
between E. coli and a wide range of Gram-positive
bacteria.
Compared with E. coli, B. subtilis has additional
requirements for efficient transcription and
translation and this can prevent the
expression of genes from Gram-negative
organisms in ones that are Gram-positive
The composition of the core RNA polymerase in B.
subtilis and other low-GC hosts resembles that of E. coli.
The number of sigma factors is different in each of
the various genera but the principal sigma factor is
sigma A. Analysis of many sigma A-dependent Bacillus
promoters shows that they contain the canonical
−35 and −10 sequences found in E. coli promoters.
In B. subtilis, at least, many promoters contain an
essential TGTG motif (−16 region) upstream of the
−10 region. Mutations of this region significantly
reduce promoter strength (Helmann 1995, Voskuil &
Chambliss 1998). The promoters also have conserved
polyA and polyT tracts upstream of the −35 region.
Although the −16 region is found in some E. coli promoters, such promoters often lack the −35 region,
whereas this never occurs in B. subtilis.
The translation apparatus of B. subtilis differs
significantly from that of E. coli (for review, see
Vellanoweth 1993). This is demonstrated by the
observation that E. coli ribosomes can support protein synthesis when directed by mRNA from a range
of Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms,
whereas ribosomes from B. subtilis recognize only
homologous mRNA (Stallcup et al. 1974). The explanation for the selectivity of B. subtilis ribosomes
is that they lack a counterpart of the largest E. coli
ribosomal protein, S1 (Higo et al. 1982, Roberts
& Rabinowitz 1989). Other Gram-positive bacteria,
such as Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Clostridium, and
Lactobacillus, also lack an S1-equivalent protein and
they too exhibit mRNA selectivity. The role of S1
is believed to be to bind RNA non-specifically and
bring it to the decoding site of the 30S subunit,
where proper positioning of the Shine–Dalgarno
(S-D) sequence and initiation codon signals can take
place. This is reflected in a more extensive complementarity between the S-D sequences and the 3′

end of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) than found
in bacteria which have ribosomal protein S1.
The additional sequence requirements for efficient
transcription and translation in B. subtilis and other
low-GC organisms probably explain why many E. coli
genes are not expressed in these hosts.
Specialist vectors have been developed that
permit controlled expression in B. subtilis and
other low-GC hosts
The first controlled expression system to be used in
B. subtilis was the Spac system (Yansura & Henner
1984). This consists of the E. coli lacI gene and the
promoter of phage SPO-1 coupled to the lac operator.
More recently, the E. coli T7 system has been successfully implemented in B. subtilis (Conrad et al.
1996). This was achieved by inserting the T7 RNA
polymerase gene (rpoT7) into the chromosome
under the control of a xylose-inducible promoter
and cloning the gene of interest, coupled to a T7 promoter, on a B. subtilis vector. Of course, expression
of the heterologous gene can be made simpler by
putting it directly under the control of the xyloseinducible promoter (Kim et al. 1996). A similar
xylose-inducible system has been developed in
staphylococci (Sizemore et al. 1991, Peschel et al.
1996) and Lactobacillus (Lokman et al. 1997). Many
different controllable promoters are available in
Lactococcus lactis (for reviews see Kuipers et al.
1995, De Vos et al. 1997) and some representative
examples are shown in Table 10.3.
In the φ31 system of L. lactis, the gene of interest
is placed under the control of a phage middle promoter inserted in a low-copy-number vector carrying the phage ori region. Following infection of
the host cell with φ31, the plasmid copy number
rapidly increases and this is followed by expression

Table 10.3 Some inducible systems in L. lactis.

Promoter

Inducer

lacA or lacR
dnaJ
sodA
PA170
trpE
f31 and ori
nisA or nisF

Lactose
High temperature
Aeration
Low pH, low temperature
Absence of tryptophan
f31 infection
Nisin

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

from the phage promoter. Following induction in
this manner, the level of expression of the cloned
gene can increase over 1000-fold (O’Sullivan et al.
1996). Similar levels of expression can be achieved
by using the nisA and nisF systems but with the
added advantage that the exact level of expression
depends on the amount of nisin added to the medium
(Kuipers et al. 1995, De Ruyter et al. 1996).

Ter

As an aid to understanding gene function
in B. subtilis, vectors have been developed for
directed gene inactivation
With the advent of mass sequencing of genomes
(see Chapter 7), many genes have been discovered
whose function is unknown. One way of determin-

Pspac
MCS
Op

HindIII
EcoRI
NotI
SacII
BamHI

EmR

Vectors have been developed that facilitate
secretion of foreign proteins from B. subtilis
The export mechanism in Bacillus and other lowGC bacteria resembles that of E. coli (for review, see
Tjalsma et al. 2000). However, there are differences
in the signal peptides compared with those found
in E. coli and eukaryotes. The NH2 termini are
more positively charged. The signal peptides are also
larger and the extra length is distributed among
all three regions of the signal peptide. Hols et al.
(1992) developed two probe vectors for the identification of Gram-positive secretion signals. These
vectors made use of a silent reporter gene encoding
the mature α-amylase from Bacillus licheniformis.
The disadvantage of this system is that detection of
secreted amylase involves flooding starch-containing
media with iodine and this kills the bacteria in the
colonies. Consequently, replica plates must be made
before iodine addition.
Poquet et al. (1998) have developed an alternative probe system which uses the S. aureus-secreted
nuclease as a reporter. This nuclease is a small
(168 amino acid), stable, monomeric enzyme that
is devoid of cysteine residues and the enzymatic test
is nontoxic to bacterial colonies. The probe vectors
have the nuclease gene, lacking its signal sequence,
located downstream from an MCS. Cloning DNA in
the vectors results in the synthesis of fusion proteins
and those containing signal sequences are detected
by nuclease activity in the growth medium. Le Loir
et al. (1998) have noted that inclusion of a nineresidue synthetic propeptide immediately downstream of the signal-peptide cleavage site significantly
enhances secretion.

195

pMUTIN

lacZ

ApR

ori

lacI

Fig. 10.10 A typical pMUTIN vector. The EmR, lacI, and
lacZ genes are expressed in B. subtilis and the ApR gene is
expressed in E. coli. Ter indicates the presence of a terminator
to prevent run-through transcription from the EmR gene.
Op represents the LacI operator.

ing function is to inactivate the gene and then
monitor the effect of this on cell fitness under different growth conditions. To study the functions of
uncharacterized open reading frames in B. subtilis,
Vagner et al. (1998) constructed a series of vectors
to perform directed insertional mutagenesis in the
chromosome. These vectors, which have been
given the designation pMUTIN, have the following
properties:
•
•
•

an inability to replicate in B. subtilis, which
allows insertional mutagenesis;
a reporter lacZ gene to facilitate the measurement
of expression of the target gene;
the inducible Pspac promoter to allow controlled
expression of genes downstream of and found in
the same operon as the target gene.

A typical pMUTIN vector is shown in Fig. 10.10
and their mode of use is as follows. An internal fragment of the target gene is amplified by the PCR and
cloned in a pMUTIN vector and the resulting plasmid
is used to transform B. subtilis. Upon integration, the
target gene is interrupted and a transcriptional
fusion is generated between its promoter and the
reporter lacZ gene (Fig. 10.11). If the targeted gene is
part of an operon, then any genes downstream of it
are placed under the control of the Pspac promoter.

196

CHAPTER 10

ori

lacl

ApR
EmR
lacZ
Pspac

orf1

lacZ

orf2

lacI
ori

orf1

orf3

ApR

EmR

Pspac

∆orf2

It should be noted that the procedure shown in
Fig. 10.11 simultaneously generates two types
of mutants: an absolute (null) mutation in orf2
through gene inactivation, and a conditional mutation in orf3, which can be relieved by induction with
isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside (IPTG).
The mechanism whereby B. subtilis is
transformed with plasmid DNA facilitates
the ordered assembly of dispersed genes
There are many economically important biomolecules, such as antibiotics, that are the end product of
long metabolic pathways. The easiest way to manipulate the synthesis of these molecules is to clone all
the relevant genes and coordinate their expression.
Such a cloning exercise is easy if all the genes are
clustered in one or two locations in their natural host.
However, if the genes are dispersed throughout the
chromosome then cloning them all becomes a major
exercise. For example, when Szczebara et al. (2003)
generated a microbial strain that could synthesize
hydrocortisone it was necessary to introduce progressively eight different mammalian genes.
A major problem in the assembly of dispersed
genes is the requirement for circular DNA molecules
for plasmid transformation of E. coli. When different
gene segments are assembled in a linear order then
it is necessary to undertake intermolecule ligation.
To form a circular plasmid requires intramolecule
ligation. The experimental conditions that favor
the two types of ligation are quite different and the
greater the number of fragments to be ligated the less
likely it will be that a circular plasmid carrying all
the fragments will be formed. By contrast, B. subtilis
can be transformed with linear DNA molecules
provided that they carry partial duplications (see

orf3

Fig. 10.11 Integration of pMUTIN into
a target gene. Genes of the orf1–orf3
operon are indicated as white boxes.
Purple box corresponds to the internal
segment of the target gene. The vector is
integrated in orf2 by a single crossing-over
event. (Figure reproduced from Microbiology
courtesy of Dr. S.D. Ehrlich and the Society
for General Microbiology.)

Box 10.1). Tsuge et al. (2003) have made use of this
fact to develop a method for the one-step assembly
of multiple DNA fragments with a desired order and
orientation.
Suppose we wish to construct a single plasmid
carrying five genes (A, B, C, D, E) that are dispersed
in their natural host. The first step is to isolate each
of the genes by PCR-mediated amplification using
primers with sites for endonuclease SfiI at their 5′
ends. This results in the isolation of duplex DNA
molecules carrying the desired genes flanked by
sequences carrying sites for SfiI. By carefully selecting the 5′ primer extensions it is possible to generate
different three-base overhangs after digestion with
SfiI (Fig. 10.12) so that no individual duplex can
self-anneal. In this way, each of the five gene fragments is bounded by a unique pair of overhangs and
these control the sequence in which the fragments
can be assembled. The cloning vector that will carry
the gene assembly has two sites for SfiI and after
digestion a linear molecule is produced that also has
unique three-base overhangs (Fig. 10.12). Multimers
are produced when the gene fragments and the
linearized vector are ligated together (Fig. 10.13)
and following transformation of B. subtilis circular
plasmid monomers are formed with the different
genes in the correct order.
A variety of different methods can be used
to transform high-GC organisms such as the
streptomycetes
Cloning in Streptomyces has attracted a lot of
interest because of the large number of antibiotics
that are made by members of this genus. Although
Streptomyces coelicolor is the model species for genetic
studies (Hopwood 1999), many other species are

(a)

GG C CNNNNNGG C C
C C GGNNNNNC C GG

The SfiI recognition sequence

(b)
GG
CC
AA
C
TC
GG
CC

Gene A
CC
GG
TC
AA
G
CC

Amplification

GG

GG C C A A C T C GG C C
C C GG T T G A G C C GG

GG C C A G T T C GG C C

Gene A

C C GG T C A A G C C GG

SfiI cleavage

C GG C C
T G A G C C GG

GG C C A G T T

Gene A

C C GG T

(c)

CAA

GA T

ACT

TC
AG T

T
ACGA

T

GT T

Gene B

Gene C

Gene D

Gene E

A TG

SfiI

Vector
p
Am

T AC

Gene A

A

TGA

SfiI

R

CTA

i
or

TGA

TCT
AGA

ori

AmpR

ACT

Fig. 10.12 The addition of three-base overhangs to cloned genes. (a) The recognition sequence for the restriction endonuclease
SfiI. Note that the base sequence in the middle of the recognition sequence can be varied at will. (b) The use of primers with 5′
extensions encoding an SfiI recognition site to amplify a gene (gene A). Note that the nucleotides in the center of the two SfiI
sites are not the same. (c) The overhangs generated on the ends of each amplified gene and the vector.

198

A

T

A

B

C

D

E

T
A

G

A

C

T

C
T

T

C

A

A

G

A

A

A

G

E

D

T

C

G

T

A

A
T
C

C

B

A

A

G

T

T

T

G

Ve
ct
or

A

C

T

CHAPTER 10

Vector

A

B

C

D

E

Vector

C

D

E

A

B

Vector

B. subtilis

Fig. 10.13 The assembly of the five genes (A, B, C, D, and E) and the vector generated by the method shown in Fig. 10.12.
Following ligation, multimers of varying length will be produced and upon transformation these are resolved into a circular
plasmid with a single copy of each gene.

the subject of intensive study and methods developed
for one species may not work particularly well in
another.
Streptomycete DNA has a G+C content of 70–75%
and this affects the frequency of restriction sites.
As might be expected, AT-rich recognition sites are
rare and this can be useful if large-sized fragments
of DNA are wanted. For the construction of gene
libraries, the most commonly used enzymes are
ones with a high GC content in their recognition

sequence, e.g. BamH1 (G′GATCC), BglII (A′GATCT),
and BclI (T′GATCA).
In Streptomyces, promoters may be several
hundred base pairs upstream of the start of the
gene and so can be lost during gene cloning. Also,
many Streptomyces promoters are complex and may
include tandem sites for recognition by different
sigma factors. Streptomycetes are good at expressing genes (promoters, ribosome binding sites, etc.)
from low-G+C organisms, but Streptomyces genes are

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

usually difficult to express in E. coli because most
promoters do not function, and translation may be
inefficient unless the initial amino acid codons are
changed to lower-G+C alternatives.
There are several ways in which DNA can be introduced into streptomycetes, including transformation, transfection, and conjugation. Transformation
is achieved by using protoplasts, rather than competent cells, and high frequencies of plasmid DNA
uptake can be achieved in the presence of polyethylene glycol (Bibb et al. 1978). Plasmid monomers
that are covalently closed will yield 106–107 transformants/µg of DNA, even with plasmids up to
60 kb in size. Open circular and linearized molecules
with sticky ends transform with 10–100-fold lower
efficiency (Bibb et al. 1980). The number of transformants obtained with non-replicating plasmids
that integrate by homologous recombination into
the recipient chromosome is greatly stimulated by
simple denaturation of the donor DNA (Oh & Chater
1997). This stimulation reflects an increased frequency of recombination rather than an increased
frequency of DNA uptake. Electroporation has been
used to transform streptomycetes, since it bypasses
the need to develop protoplast regeneration procedures (Pigac & Schrempf 1995, Tyurin et al. 1995).
For electroporation, limited non-protoplasting lysozyme treatment is used to weaken the cell wall and
improve DNA uptake. Intergeneric conjugation of
mobilizable plasmids from E. coli into streptomycetes
(see p. 186) is increasingly being used, because the
required constructs can be made easily in E. coli
and the conjugation protocols are simple. For intergeneric conjugation to occur, the vectors have to
carry the oriT locus from RP4 and the E. coli strain
needs to supply the transfer functions in trans
(Mazodier et al. 1989).
Transformants are generally identified by the
selection of appropriate phenotypes. However, antibiotic resistance has much less utility than in other
Table 10.4
Streptomyces plasmids
that have been used in
the development of
vectors.

Plasmid
pIJ101
pJV1
pSG5
SCP2*
SLP1
pSAM2

199

organisms, because many streptomycetes produce
antibiotics and hence have innate resistance to
them. One particularly useful phenomenon is that
clones harboring conjugative plasmids can be detected
by the visualization of pocks. The property of pock
formation, also known as lethal zygosis, is exhibited
if a strain containing a conjugative plasmid is
replica-plated on to a lawn of the corresponding
plasmid-free strain. Under these conditions, clones
containing plasmids are surrounded by a narrow
zone in which the growth of the plasmid-free strain
is retarded (Chater & Hopwood 1983).
Most of the vectors used with streptomycetes
are derivatives of endogenous plasmids and
bacteriophages
With the exception of RSF1010 (see p. 185), no
plasmid from any other organism has been found
to replicate in Streptomyces. For this reason, all the
cloning vectors used in streptomycetes are derived
from plasmids and phages that occur naturally in
them. The different replicons that have been subjugated as vectors are listed in Table 10.4. Nearly all
Streptomyces plasmids carry transfer functions that
permit conjugative plasmid transfer and provide
different levels of chromosome-mobilizing activity.
These transfer functions are very simple, consisting of a single transfer gene and a repressor of gene
function.
Plasmid SCP2* is a deriviative of the sex plasmid
SCP2 (Lydiate et al. 1985). Both plasmids have
a size of 31.4 kb and are physically indistinguishable, although SCP2* exhibits a much more
pronounced lethal zygosis reaction. SCP2* is
important because it is the progenitor of many
very low-copy-number, stable vectors. High-copynumber derivatives have also been isolated with
the exact copy number (10 or 1000) being dependent on the sequences from the replication region

Size

Mode of replication

8.8 kb
11.1 kb
12.2 kb
31 kb
17.2 kb
10.9 kb

Rolling circle
Rolling circle
Rolling circle
Theta
Rolling circle
Rolling circle

Copy number

Host range

300
20–50
1–4
Integrating
Integrating

Broad
Broad
Limited
Broad

200

CHAPTER 10

that are present. SLP1 and pSAM2 are examples
of Streptomyces plasmids that normally reside integrated into a specific highly conserved chromosomal
transfer RNA (tRNA) sequence (Kieser & Hopwood
1991). Many different specialist vectors have been
derived from these plasmids, including cosmids,
expression vectors, vectors with promoterless reporter genes, positive-selection vectors, temperaturesensitive vectors, etc., and full details can be found
in Kieser et al. (2000).
The temperate phage φC31 is the streptomycete
equivalent of phage λ and has been subjugated as a
vector. φC31-derived vectors have upper and lower
size limits for clonable fragments with an average
insert size of 8 kb. In contrast, there are no such size
constraints on plasmid cloning, although recombinant plasmids of a size greater than 35 kb are rare with
the usual vectors. However, phage vectors do have
one important advantage: plaques can be obtained
overnight, whereas plasmid transformants can take
up to 1 week to sporulate. Plasmid-integrating vectors
can be generated by incorporating the integration
functions of φC31.
As noted earlier, a major reason for cloning in
streptomycetes is to analyze the genetics and regulation of antibiotic synthesis. Although all the genes
for a few complete biosynthetic pathways have been
cloned (Malpartida & Hopwood 1985, Kao et al. 1994,
Schwecke et al. 1995), some gene clusters may be
too large to be cloned in the standard vectors. For
this reason, Sosio et al. (2000) generated bacterial
artificial chromosomes (BACs) that can accommodate up to 100 kb of streptomycete DNA. These vectors
can be shuttled between E. coli, where they replicate
autonomously, and Streptomyces, where they integrate site-specifically into the chromosome.

coupled with a growing number of complete genome
sequences, there has been considerable interest in
developing suitable gene-cloning procedures.
As noted earlier (p. 179), there are three basic
requirements for gene cloning in any organism: a
means of introducing DNA into recipients (usually
transformation); suitable plasmid vectors; and
selectable markers. All three requirements have
been met (for review, see Luo & Wasserfallen 2001)
but progress lags far behind that made with the
major eubacterial groups. In most Archaea investigated so far, electroporation is the only method of
getting DNA into cells and the observed efficiencies
are low (~102 transformants/µg). Several species
appear to be naturally transformable but, again,
efficiencies are as low as with electroporation.
Much higher efficiencies (e.g. 107 transformants/g)
have been observed with some methanogens using
polyethylene glycol-mediated transformation or
liposome-mediated transformation.
A number of plasmids and viruses have been identified and a number of these have been converted into
shuttle vectors and used to develop gene-transfer
systems (Sowers & Schreier 1999). Most of the selective markers used are based on resistance to antibiotics such as puromycin, novobiocin, thiostreptin,
and mevinolin. More advanced vectors such as integrating vectors and expression vectors also have been
developed. The usefulness of integration vectors has
been demonstrated by insertional mutagenesis in
methanogens. Three reporter genes for expression
studies also have been used in methanogens:
β-glucuronidase and β-galactosidase from E. coli and
trehalase from B. subtilis.

Suggested reading
Cloning in Archaea
Organisms are divided into three domains: Bacteria
(eubacteria), Archaea (archaebacteria), and Eucarya
(eukaryotes). The Archaea comprises at least three
major groups of prokaryotic organisms with unusual
phenotypes when compared with their eubacterial
counterparts. For example, many of them thrive
in extreme environments such as ones with very
high temperatures, high pH, or high salt concentrations. Others are strictly anaerobic methanogens
that live in the rumen of herbivores. Because many
Archaea exhibit interesting physiological properties,

Chen I. & Dubnau D. (2004) DNA uptake during
bacterial transformation. Nature Reviews Microbiology
2, 241–9.
This paper reviews the current state of knowledge about
transformation in bacteria that naturally are competent for
DNA uptake.
Davison J. (2002) Genetic tools for Pseudomonads,
Rhizobia, and other Gram-negative bacteria.
BioTechniques 32, 386–401.
A review giving an additional perspective on the material
presented in this chapter.
Luo Y. & Wasserfallen A. (2001) Gene transfer systems
and their applications in Archaea. Systematic and
Applied Microbiology 24, 15–25.

Cloning in bacteria other than Escherichia coli

A review of gene manipulation in a group of “exotic”
bacteria that are attracting much interest because of the
novel properties of their proteins.
Martinez A., Kolvek S.J., Yip C.L., et al. (2004) Genetically modified bacterial strains and novel bacterial
artificial chromosome shuttle vectors for constructing
environmental libraries and detecting heterologous
natural products in multiple expression hosts. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 70, 2452–63.
Middleton R. & Hofmeister A. (2004) New shuttle
vectors for ectopic insertion of genes into Bacillus
subtilis. Plasmid 51, 238–45.

201

Quandt J., Clark R.G., Venter A.P., et al. (2004) Modified
RP4 and Tn5-Mob derivatives for facilitated manipulation of large plasmids in Gram-negative bacteria.
Plasmid 52, 1–12.
Takken F.L., Van Wijk R., Michielse C.B., et al. (2004)
A one-step method to convert vectors into binary
vectors suited for Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Current Genetics 45, 242–8.
The four papers listed above represent a good selection of
current work on the development of improved vectors for use
in bacteria other than Escherichia coli.

CHAPTER 11
Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and other fungi

There are a number of reasons for cloning
DNA in S. cerevisiae
When recombinant DNA technology was first applied
to fungi in the late 1970s the organism of choice
was the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. At that time
the primary purpose of cloning was to understand
what particular genes do in vivo and the concomitant development of DNA sequencing methodology
facilitated the identification of the different elements
that control gene expression in fungi. A secondary
reason for cloning in yeast was to understand those
cellular functions unique to eukaryotes such as
mitosis, meiosis, signal transduction, obligate cellular differentiation, etc. Today, just over a quarter of a
century later, there are different reasons for cloning
in S. cerevisiae and other fungi.
In 1996 the sequencing of the entire 12 Mb
genome of S. cerevisiae was completed and most, if
not all, of the genes have been identified. The key
biological questions now are what products do each
of these genes encode, how do the different gene
products interact, and under what circumstances is
each gene expressed? Answering these questions still
requires gene manipulation but the emphasis has
switched from analysis of individual genes to that of
the whole genome. That is, there has been a switch
from the reductive approach to a holistic one.
A second reason for the current interest in gene
manipulation in fungi is the overproduction of proteins of commercial value. Fungi offer a number
of advantages, such as the ability to glycosylate protein, the absence of pyrogenic toxins, and in the case
of the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris, the ability
to get very high yields of recombinant proteins.
Yeasts and other fungi are widely used in the production of food and beverages and recombinant DNA
technology can be used to enhance their desirable
properties.
The third reason for the current interest in the
application of recombinant DNA technology in yeast

is the ability to clone very large pieces of DNA,
an essential requirement for many whole-genome
studies. Although there is no theoretical limit to
the size of DNA that can be cloned in a bacterial plasmid in practice it is found that large inserts cause
structural and segregative instability. Certain yeast
vectors (YACs, p. 213) can accept inserts greater
than 1 Mb, much greater than those found in BACs
and PACs. Although the early YACs had a tendency
to be unstable this problem has largely been eliminated in the new generation of YACs.
Fungi are not naturally transformable and
special methods are required to introduce
exogenous DNA
Like E. coli, fungi are not naturally transformable
and artificial means have to be used for introducing
foreign DNA. One method involves the use of spheroplasts (i.e. wall-less cells) and was first developed
for S. cerevisiae (Hinnen et al. 1978). In this method,
the cell wall is removed enzymically and the resulting spheroplasts are fused with ethylene glycol in
the presence of DNA and CaCl2. The spheroplasts are
then allowed to generate new cell walls in a stabilizing medium containing 3% agar. This latter step
makes subsequent retrieval of cells inconvenient.
Electroporation provides a simpler and more convenient alternative to the use of spheroplasts. Cells
transformed by electroporation can be selected on the
surface of solid media, thus facilitating subsequent
manipulation. Both the spheroplast technique and
electroporation have been applied to a wide range
of yeasts and filamentous fungi.
DNA can also be introduced into yeasts and filamentous fungi by conjugation. Heinemann & Sprague
(1989) and Sikorski et al. (1990) found that enterobacterial plasmids, such as R751 (IncPβ) and F
(IncF), could facilitate plasmid transfer from E. coli
to S. cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The
bacterial plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

contains a large plasmid, the Ti plasmid, and part
of this plasmid (the transferred DNA (T-DNA)) can be
conjugally transferred to protoplasts of S. cerevisiae
(Bundock et al. 1995) and a range of filamentous
fungi (De Groot et al. 1998). T-DNA can also be
transferred to hyphae and conidia.
Exogenous DNA that is not carried on a vector
can only be maintained by integration into a
chromosome
In the original experiments on transformation of
S. cerevisiae, Hinnen et al. (1978) transformed a
leucine auxotroph with the plasmid pYeLeu 10. This
plasmid is a hybrid composed of the enterobacterial
plasmid ColE1 and a segment of yeast DNA containing the LEU2+ gene and is unable to replicate in
yeast. Analysis of the transformants showed that in
some of them there had been reciprocal recombination between the incoming LEU2+ and the recipient
Leu2− alleles. In the majority of the transformants,
ColE1 DNA was also present and genetic analysis
showed that in some of them the LEU2+ allele was
closely linked to the original Leu2− allele, whereas in
the remaining ones the LEU2+ allele was on a different chromosome.
The results described above can be confirmed by
restriction-endonuclease analysis, since pYeLeu 10
contains no cleavage sites for HindIII. When DNA
from the Leu2− parent was digested with endonuclease HindIII and electrophoresed in agarose, multiple
DNA fragments were observed but only one of
these hybridized with DNA from pYeLeu 10. With
the transformants in which the Leu2− and LEU2+

203

alleles were linked, only a single fragment of DNA
hybridized to pYeLeu 10, but this had an increased
size, consistent with the insertion of a complete
pYeLeu 10 molecule into the original fragment.
These data are consistent with there being a tandem
duplication of the Leu2 region of the chromosome
(Fig. 11.1). With the remaining transformants,
two DNA fragments that hybridized to pYeLeu 10
could be found on electrophoresis. One fragment
corresponded to the fragment seen with DNA from
the recipient cells, the other to the plasmid genome
which had been inserted in another chromosome
(see Fig. 11.1). These results represented the first
unambiguous demonstration that foreign DNA, in
this case cloned ColE1 DNA, can integrate into the
genome of a eukaryote. A plasmid such as pYeLeu
10 which can do this is known as a yeast integrating
plasmid (YIp).
During transformation, the integration of exogenous DNA can occur by recombination with a
homologous or an unrelated sequence. In most cases,
non-homologous integration is more common than
homologous recombination (Fincham 1989), but
this is not so in S. cerevisiae (Schiestl & Petes 1991).
In the experiments of Hinnen et al. (1978) described
above, sequences of the yeast retrotransposon Ty2
were probably responsible for the integration of the
plasmid in novel locations of the genome, i.e. the
“illegitimate” recombinants were the result of homologous crossovers within a repeated element (Kudla
& Nicolas 1992). Based on a similar principle, a novel
vector has been constructed by Kudla and Nicolas
(1992) which allows integration of a cloned DNA
sequence at different sites in the genome. This feature

Electrophoretic separation
of HindIII generated
fragments which hybridize
with pYeLeu 10

Chromosome structure of
transformants and recipient
HindIII HindIII
Recipient
Leu2–

Leu2+
Transformants
Leu2– pYeLeu10
Leu2–

pYeLeu10

Fig. 11.1 Analysis of yeast
transformants. (See text for
details.)

Direction of migration

CHAPTER 11

is provided by the inclusion in the vector of a repeated
yeast sigma sequence present in approximately 20–
30 copies per genome and spread over most or all of
the 16 chromosomes.
When T-DNA from the Ti plasmid of Agrobacterium
is transferred to yeast, it too will insert in different
parts of the genome by illegitimate recombination
(Bundock & Hooykaas 1996).
Schiestl & Petes (1991) developed a method
for forcing illegitimate recombination by transforming yeast with BamHI-generated fragments
in the presence of the BamHI enzyme. Not only did
this increase the frequency of transformants but
the transformants which were obtained had the
exogenous DNA integrated into genomic BamHI
sites. This technique, which is sometimes referred to
as restriction-enzyme-mediated integration (REMI),
has been extended to other fungi, such as Cochliobolus
(Lu et al. 1994), Ustilago (Bolker et al. 1995), and
Aspergillus (Sanchez et al. 1998).
Different kinds of vectors have been
developed for use in S. cerevisiae

Yeast episomal plasmids
YEps were first constructed by Beggs (1978) by
recombining an E. coli cloning vector with the naturally occurring yeast 2 µm plasmid. This plasmid
is 6.3 kb in size, has a copy number of 50–100 per
haploid cell and has no known function. A representative YEp is shown in Fig. 11.2.
Yeast replicating plasmids
YRps were initially constructed by Struhl et al.
(1979). They isolated chromosomal fragments of
DNA which carry sequences that enable E. coli
vectors to replicate in yeast cells. Such sequences are
known as ars (autonomously replicating sequences).
An ars is quite different from a centromere: the
former acts as an origin of replication (Palzkill &
Newlon 1988, Huang & Kowalski 1993), whereas
the latter is involved in chromosome segregation.
BclI

AatII

MfeI
XbaI

AseI
AhdI

SnaBI

2µ
ci

mp

a

le
rc

HpaI

A
DN

If the heterologous DNA introduced into fungi is to
be maintained in an extrachromosomal state then
plasmid vectors are required which are capable of
replicating in the fungal host. Four types of plasmid
vector have been developed: yeast episomal plasmids (YEps), yeast replicating plasmids (YRps), yeast
centromere plasmids (YCps), and yeast artificial
chromosomes (YACs). All of them have features in
common. First, they all contain unique target sites
for a number of restriction endonucleases. Secondly,
they can all replicate in E. coli, often at high copy
number. This is important, because for many experiments it is necessary to amplify the vector DNA in
E. coli before transformation of the ultimate yeast
recipient. Finally, they all employ markers that
can be selected readily in yeast and which will
often complement the corresponding mutations in
E. coli as well. The four most widely used markers
are His3, Leu2, Trp1, and Ura3. Mutations in the
cognate chromosomal markers are recessive, and
non-reverting mutants are available. Two yeast
selectable markers, Ura3 and Lys2, have the advantage of offering both positive and negative selection.
Positive selection is for complementation of auxotrophy. Negative selection is for ability to grow on
medium containing a compound that inhibits the
growth of cells expressing the wild-type function. In
the case of Ura3, it is 5-fluoro-orotic acid (Boeke et al.

1984) and for Lys2 it is α-aminoadipate (Chatoo
et al. 1979). These inhibitors permit the ready
selection of those rare cells that have undergone a
recombination or loss event to remove the plasmid
DNA sequences. The Lys2 gene is not utilized frequently because it is large and contains sites within
the coding sequence for many of the commonly used
restriction sites.

ORI

204

BlpI

YEp 24
Tth111I

ClaI-BspDI

PvuII
BsaBI
BspEI

a3

Sbf I

ur
Tc

EagI
PshAI
SalI
EcoNI
SphI

NcoI
ApiI/Bsp1201I
SmaI/XmaI
NheI
BamHI
SgrAI

Fig. 11.2 Schematic representation of a typical yeast
episomal plasmid (YEp 24). The plasmid can replicate both
in E. coli (due to the presence of the pBR322 origin of
replication) and in S. cerevisiae (due to the presence of
the yeast 2 µm origin of replication). The ampicillin
and tetracycline determinants are derived from pBR322
and the URA3 gene from yeast.

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

205

The structure of ars elements has been elucidated
and shown to be a short (~100 bp) AT-rich sequence
with the 17-bp core consensus WWWWTTTAYRTTTWGTT where W = A or T, Y = T or C, and R = A or
G (Theis & Newlon 1997).
Although plasmids containing an ars transform
yeast very efficiently, the resulting transformants
are exceedingly unstable. For unknown reasons,
YRps tend to remain associated with the mother cell
and are not efficiently distributed to the daughter cell.
(Note: S. cerevisiae does not undergo binary fission
but buds off daughter cells instead.) Occasional
stable transformants are found and these appear to
be cases in which the entire YRp has integrated into
a homologous region on a chromosome in a manner
identical to that of YIps (Stinchcomb et al. 1979,
Nasmyth & Reed 1980).

the normal yeast chromosomes, which have a linear
structure. The ends of all yeast chromosomes, like
those of all other linear eukaryotic chromosomes,
have unique structures that are called telomeres.
Telomere structure has evolved as a device to preserve the integrity of the ends of DNA molecules,
which often cannot be finished by the conventional
mechanisms of DNA replication (for detailed discussion see Watson 1972). Szostak & Blackburn
(1982) developed the first vector which could be
maintained as a linear molecule, thereby mimicking a chromosome, by cloning yeast telomeres into
a YRp. Such vectors are known as yeast artificial
chromosomes (YACs).
The method for cloning large DNA sequences in
YACs developed by Burke et al. (1987) is shown in
Fig. 11.3.

Yeast centromere plasmids

The availability of different kinds of vector
offers yeast geneticists great flexibility

Using a YRp vector, Clarke and Carbon (1980)
isolated a number of hybrid plasmids containing
DNA segments from around the centromere-linked
leu2, cdc10, and pgk loci on chromosome III of yeast.
As expected for plasmids carrying an ars, most of
the recombinants were unstable in yeast. However,
one of them was maintained stably through mitosis
and meiosis. The stability segment was confined to
a 1.6 kb region lying between the leu2 and cdc10 loci
and its presence on plasmids carrying either of two
ars tested resulted in those plasmids behaving like
minichromosomes (Clarke & Carbon 1980, Hsiao
& Carbon 1981). Genetic markers on the minichromosomes acted as linked markers segregating in the
first meiotic division as centromere-linked genes and
were unlinked to genes on other chromosomes.
Structurally, plasmid-borne centromere sequences
have the same distinctive chromatin structure that
occurs in the centromere region of yeast chromosomes
(Bloom & Carbon 1982). Functionally YCps exhibit
three characteristics of chromosomes in yeast cells.
First, they are mitotically stable in the absence of
selective pressure. Secondly, they segregate during
meiosis in a Mendelian manner. Finally, they are
found at low copy number in the host cell.
Yeast artificial chromosomes
All three autonomous plasmid vectors described
above are maintained in yeast as circular DNA molecules – even the YCp vectors, which possess yeast
centromeres. Thus, none of these vectors resembles

The analysis of yeast DNA sequences has been facilitated by the ease with which DNA from eukaryotes
can be cloned in E. coli using the vectors described
in earlier chapters. Such cloned sequences can be
obtained easily in large amounts and can be altered
in vivo by bacterial genetic techniques and in vitro
by specific enzyme modifications. To determine the
effects of these experimentally induced changes on
the function and expression of yeast genes they need
to be taken out of bacteria and returned to the yeast
cell. The availability of different kinds of vectors
with different properties (Table 11.1) enables yeast
geneticists to do this with relative ease and to perform subsequent manipulations in yeast itself. Thus
cloned genes can be used in conventional genetic
analysis by means of recombination using YIp vectors
or linearized YRp vectors (Orr-Weaver et al. 1981).
Complementation can be carried out using YEp,
YRp, YCp, or YAC vectors, but there are a number of
factors which make YCps the vectors of choice (Rose
et al. 1987). For example, YEps and YRps exist at
high copy number in yeast and this can prevent the
isolation of genes whose products are toxic when
overexpressed, e.g. the genes for actin and tubulin.
In other cases, the overexpression of genes other
than the gene of interest can suppress the mutation
used for selection (Kuo & Campbell 1983). All the
yeast vectors can be used to create partial diploids
or partial polyploids and the extra gene sequences
can be integrated or extrachromosomal. Deletions,
point mutations, and frame-shift mutations can be

Table 11.1 Properties of the different yeast vectors.

Transformation
frequency

Copy
no./cell

YIp

102 transformants
per mg DNA

1

YEp

103–105
transformants
per mg DNA

YRp

YCp

Vector

YAC

Loss in
non-selective
medium

Disadvantages

Advantages

Much less than
1% per
generation

1 Low
transformation
frequency
2 Can only be
recovered from
yeast by cutting
chromosomal
DNA with
restriction
endonuclease
which does not
cleave original
vector containing
cloned gene

1 Of all vectors, this kind give
most stable maintenance of
cloned genes
2 An integrated YIp plasmid
behaves as an ordinary
genetic marker, e.g. a
diploid heterozygous for an
integrated plasmid
segregates the plasmid in a
Mendelian fashion
3 Most useful for surrogate
genetics of yeast, e.g. can be
used to introduce deletions,
inversions, and transpositions
(see Botstein & Davis 1982)

25–200

1% per
generation

Novel
recombinants
generated in vivo
by recombination
with endogenous
2 mm plasmid

1 Readily recovered from
yeast
2 High copy number
3 High transformation
frequency
4 Very useful for
complementation studies

104 transformants
per mg DNA

1–20

Much greater
than 1% per
generation but
can get
chromosomal
integration

Instability of
transformants

1 Readily recovered from
yeast
2 High copy number. Note
that the copy number is
usually less than that of YEp
vectors but this may be
useful if cloning gene whose
product is deleterious to the
cell if produced in excess
3 High transformation
frequency
4 Very useful for
complementation studies
5 Can integrate into the
chromosome

104 transformants
per mg DNA

1–2

Less than 1%
per generation

Low copy number
makes recovery
from yeast more
difficult than that
with YEp or YRp
vectors

1 Low copy number is useful
if product of cloned gene is
deleterious to cell
2 High transformation
frequency
3 Very useful for
complementation studies
4 At meiosis generally shows
Mendelian segregation

1–2

Depends on
length: the
longer the YAC
the more
stable it is

Difficult to map
by standard
techniques

1 High-capacity cloning
system permitting DNA
molecules greater than
40 kb to be cloned
2 Can amplify large DNA
molecules in a simple genetic
background

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

207

Target DNA

EcoRI
cloning site
CEN4
ARS1
URA 3

TRP1
pYAC vector
AMP
ori
TEL
BamHI

Fig. 11.3
Construction of a yeast
artificial chromosome
containing large pieces
of cloned DNA. Key
regions of the pYAC
vector are as follows:
TEL, yeast telomeres;
ARS1, autonomously
replicating sequence;
CEN4, centromere
from chromosome 4;
URA3 and TRP1, yeast
marker genes; Amp,
ampicillin-resistance
determinant of
pBR322; ori, origin of
replication of pBR322.

TEL
BamHI
BamHI and
EcoRI-digest

Partial
EcoRI-digest

TRP ARS CEN

URA

Ligate

TEL

TRP ARS CEN

introduced in vitro into cloned genes and the altered
genes returned to yeast and used to replace the wildtype allele. Excellent reviews of these techniques have
been presented by Botstein and Davis (1982), Hicks
et al. (1982), Struhl (1983) and Stearns et al. (1990).
Recombinogenic engineering can be used to
move genes from one vector to another
During the process of analyzing a particular cloned
gene it is often necessary to change the plasmid’s
selective marker. Alternatively, it may be desired
to move the cloned gene to a different plasmid,
e.g. from a YCp to a YEp. Again, genetic analysis
may require many different alleles of a cloned gene
to be introduced to a particular plasmid for subsequent functional studies. All these objectives can
be achieved by standard in vitro techniques, but Ma
et al. (1987) showed that methods based on recombination in vivo are much quicker. The underlying
principle is that linearized plasmids are repaired
during yeast transformation by recombination with

URA

TEL

a homologous DNA restriction fragment. It should
be noted that this was the first demonstration of
recombinogenic engineering (see p. 79) and significantly predated the development of this technique in
E. coli.
Suppose we wish to move the HIS3 gene from
pBR328, which cannot replicate in yeast, to YEp420
(see Fig. 11.4). Plasmid pRB328 is cut with PvuI
and PvuII and the HIS3 fragment selected. The HIS3
fragment is mixed with YEp420 which has been
linearized with EcoRI and the mixture transformed
into yeast. Two crossover events occurring between
homologous regions flanking the EcoRI site of YEp420
will result in the generation of a recombinant YEp
containing both the HIS3 and URA3 genes. The
HIS3 gene can be selected directly. If this were not
possible, selection could be made for the URA3 gene,
for a very high proportion of the clones will also
carry the HIS3 gene. Many other variations of the
above method have been described by Ma et al.
(1987), to whom the interested reader is referred
for details.

208

CHAPTER 11

Initiator
PvuI

UAS

PvuII

URS

Coding
sequence

TATA

AmpR

mRNA

pBR328
40–120 bp

EcoRI
20–40 bp

SalI
BamHI

H IS 3

100–1400 bp

PvuI + PvuII

Fig. 11.5 Structure of typical yeast promoters.
(See text for details.)

EcoRI
HIS3

BamHI

SalI

PvuI
BamHI
SalI

PvuI

PvuII

2 µm

URA

3

EcoRI-cut
YEp420

2µ

Recombination

EcoRI

PvuI
Amp

R

HI

S

3

BamHI
SalI

2 µm

2µ

3

Recombinant

UR

A

Fig. 11.4 Plasmid construction by homologous
recombination in yeast. pRB328 is digested with PvuI and
PvuII and the HIS3-containing fragment is transformed
into yeast along with the EcoRI-cut YEp420. Homologous
recombination occurs between pBR322 sequences, shown
as thin lines, to generate a new plasmid carrying both HIS3
and URA3.

Yeast promoters are more complex than
bacterial promoters
When gene manipulation in fungi first became
possible, there were many unsuccessful attempts to
express heterologous genes from bacteria or higher
eukaryotes. This suggested that fungal promoters
have a unique structure, a feature first shown for
S. cerevisiae (Guarente 1987). Four structural elements
can be recognized in the average yeast promoter

(Fig. 11.5). First, several consensus sequences are
found at the transcription-initiation site. Two of these
sequences, TC(G/A)A and PuPuPyPuPu, account
for more than half of the known yeast initiation sites
(Hahn et al. 1985, Rudolph & Hinnen 1987). These
sequences are not found at transcription-initiation
sites in higher eukaryotes, which implies a mechanistic difference in their transcription machinery
compared with yeast.
The second motif in the yeast promoter is the
TATA box (Dobson et al. 1982). This is an AT-rich
region with the canonical sequence TATAT/AAT/A,
located 60–120 nucleotides before the initiation
site. Functionally, it can be considered equivalent to
the Pribnow box of E. coli promoters (see p. 82).
The third and fourth structural elements are upstream activating sequences (UASs) and upstream
repressing sequences (URSs). These are found in
genes whose transcription is regulated. Binding of
positive-control proteins to UASs increases the rate
of transcription and deletion of the UASs abolishes
transcription. An important structural feature of
UASs is the presence of one or more regions of
dyad symmetry (Rudolph & Hinnen 1987). Binding
of negative-control proteins to URSs reduces the
transcription rate of those genes that need to be
negatively regulated.
The level of transcription can be affected by
sequences located within the gene itself and which
are referred to as downstream activating sequences
(DASs). Chen et al. (1984) noted that, when using
the phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) promoter, several heterologous proteins accumulate to 1–2% of
total cell protein, whereas phosphoglycerate kinase
itself accumulates to over 50%. These disappointing
amounts of heterologous protein reflect the levels
of mRNA which were due to a lower level of initiation rather than a reduced mRNA half-life (Mellor
et al. 1987). Addition of downstream PGK sequences
restored the rate of mRNA transcription, indicating
the presence of a DAS. Evidence for these DASs has
been found in a number of other genes.

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

Promoter systems have been developed to
facilitate overexpression of recombinant
proteins in yeast
The first overexpression systems developed were
for S. cerevisiae and used promoters from genes
encoding abundant glycolytic enzymes, e.g. alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH1), PGK or glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase (GAP). These are strong
promoters and mRNA transcribed from them can
accumulate up to 5% of total. They were at first
thought to be constitutive but later were shown to
be induced by glucose (Tuite et al. 1982). Now there
is a large variety of native and engineered pro-

209

moters available (Table 11.2), differing in strength,
regulation, and induction ratio. These have been
reviewed in detail by Romanos et al. (1992).
The ideal promoter is one that is tightly regulated
so that the growth phase can be separated from the
induction phase. This minimizes the selection of
non-expressing cells and can permit the expression
of proteins normally toxic to the cell. The ideal promoter will also have a high induction ratio. One
promoter which has these characteristics and which
is now the most widely used is that from the GAL1
gene. Galactose regulation in yeast is now extremely
well studied and has become a model system for
eukaryotic transcriptional regulation (see Box 11.1).

Table 11.2 Common fungal promoters used for manipulation of gene expression.

Species
General
S. cerevisiae

Candida albicans
Methanol utilizers
Candida boidnii
Hansenula polymorpha
Pichia methanolica
Pichia pastoris

Lactose utilizer
Kluyveromyces lactis

Starch utilizer
Schwanniomyces
occidentalis
Xylose utilizer
Pichia stipitis
Alkane utilizer
Yarrowia lipolytica

Promoter

Gene

Regulation

PGK
GAL1
PHOS
ADH2
CUP1
MFa1

Phosphoglycerate kinase
Galactokinase
Acid phosphatase
Alcohol dehydrogenase II
Copper metallothionein
Mating factor a1

MET3

ATP sulfur lyase

AOD1
MOX
AUG1
AOX1
GAP
FLD1
PEX8
YPT1

Alcohol oxidase
Alcohol oxidase
Alcohol oxidase
Alcohol oxidase
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Formaldehyde dehydrogenase
Peroxin
Secretory GTPase

Methanol- or methylamine-induced
Methanol-induced
Medium constitutive

LAC4
PGK
ADH4

b-Galactosidase
Phosphoglycerate kinase
Alcohol dehydrogenase

Lactose-induced
Strong constitutive
Ethanol-induced

AMY1

a-Amylase

Maltose- or starch-induced

GAM1

Glucoamylase

Maltose- or starch-induced

XYL1
XPR2
TEF
RPS7

Glucose-induced
Galactose-induced
Phosphate-repressed
Glucose-repressed
Copper-induced
Constitutive but temperature-induced
variant available
Repressed by methionine and cysteine
Methanol-induced
Methanol-induced
Methanol-induced
Methanol-induced
Strong constitutive

Xylose-induced
Extracellular protease
Translation elongation factor
Ribosomal protein S7

Peptone-induced
Strong constitutive
Strong constitutive

210

CHAPTER 11

Box 11.1 Galactose metabolism and its control in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Galactose is metabolized to glucose-6phosphate in yeast by an identical pathway to
that operating in other organisms (Fig. B11.1).
The key enzymes and their corresponding
genes are a kinase (GAL1), a transferase
(GAL7), an epimerase (GAL10), and a mutase
(GAL5). Melibiose (galactosyl-glucose) is
metabolized by the same enzymes after
cleavage by an a-galactosidase encoded by
the MEL1 gene. Galactose uptake by yeast cells
is via a permease encoded by the GAL2 gene.
The GAL5 gene is constitutively expressed. All
the others are induced by growth on galactose
and repressed during growth on glucose.
The GAL1, GAL7, and GAL10 genes are
clustered on chromosome II but transcribed
separately from individual promoters. The GAL2
and MEL1 genes are on other chromosomes.
The GAL4 gene encodes a protein that activates

transcription of the catabolic genes by binding
UAS 5′ to each gene. The GAL80 gene encodes
a repressor that binds directly to the GAL4 gene
product, thus preventing it from activating
transcription. The GAL3 gene product catalyzes
the conversion of galactose to an inducer,
which combines with the GAL80 gene product,
preventing it from inhibiting the GAL4 protein
from binding to DNA (Fig. B11.2).
The expression of the GAL genes is repressed
during growth on glucose. The regulatory
circuit responsible for this phenomenon,
termed catabolite repression, is superimposed
upon the circuit responsible for induction of
GAL gene expression. Very little is known
about its mechanism.
For a review of galactose metabolism in
S. cerevisiae, the reader should consult
Johnston (1987).

Medium

MEL1
α-galactosidase
Melibiose

Cytoplasm

GAL2
Permease

Galactose

GAL1
Kinase
Galactose

GAL7
Transferase

GAL5
Mutase

Gal–1–P

Glu–1–P

UDP–Glu

UDP–Gal

Glu–6–P

Epimerase
GAL10

Fig. B11.1 The genes and enzymes associated with the metabolism of galactose by yeast.

GAL3
Galactose

Inducer
GAL80 protein–inducer
complex
GAL4 protein binds to UASs
and activates GAL transcription
GAL80
protein
No
inducer

Fig. B11.2 The regulation of transcription of the yeast galactose genes.

GAL80 protein complexes
GAL4 protein and prevents
activation of GAL transcription

Glycolysis

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

Following addition of galactose, GAL1 mRNA is
rapidly induced over 1000-fold and can reach 1%
of total mRNA. However, the promoter is strongly
repressed by glucose and so in glucose-grown cultures this induction only occurs following depletion
of glucose. To facilitate galactose induction in the
presence of glucose, mutants have been isolated which
are insensitive to glucose repression (Matsumoto
et al. 1983, Horland et al. 1989). The trans-activator
GAL4 protein is present in only one or two molecules
per cell and so GAL1 transcription is limited. With
multicopy expression vectors, GAL4 limitation is
exacerbated. However, GAL4 expression can be made
autocatalytic by fusing the GAL4 gene to a GAL10
promoter (Schultz et al. 1987), i.e. GAL4 expression
is now regulated (induced) by galactose.
In recent years, methylotrophic yeasts, such as
Pichia pastoris, have proved extremely popular as
hosts for the overexpression of heterologous proteins. There are a number of reasons for this. First,
the alcohol oxidase (AOX1) promoter is one of the
strongest and most regulatable promoters known.
Second, it is possible to stably integrate expression
plasmids at specific sites in the genome in either
single or multiple copies. Third, the strains can be

cultivated to very high density. To date, over 300
foreign proteins have been produced in P. pastoris
(Cereghino & Cregg 1999, 2000). Promoters for
use in other yeasts are shown in Table 11.2.
A number of specialist multi-purpose vectors
have been developed for use in yeast
Many different specialist yeast vectors have been
developed which incorporate the useful features found
in the corresponding E. coli vectors (see p. 94), e.g. an
f1 origin to permit sequencing of inserts, production of
the cloned gene product as a purification fusion, etc.
Some representative examples are shown in Fig. 11.6.
Two aspects of these vectors warrant further discussion: secretion and surface display.
In yeast, proteins destined for the cell surface or
for export from the cell are synthesized on and translocated into the endoplasmic reticulum. From there
they are transported to the Golgi body for processing
and packaging into secretory vesicles. Fusion of the
secretory vesicles with the plasma membrane then
occurs constitutively or in response to an external
signal (reviewed by Rothman & Orci 1992). Of the
proteins naturally synthesized and secreted by yeast,

6xHis

STOP

BstBI
EcoRI
PmlI
SfiI
BsmBI
Asp718I
KpnI
XhoI
SacII
NotI
ApaI*
XbaI*
SnaBI*

V5 epitope

pPICZ A, B, C
PmeI

HindIII
Asp718I
KpnI
SacI
BamHI
BstXI
EcoRI
BstXI
NotI
XhoI
XbaI*

Polylinkers for C-terminal tagged vectors
T7

P GAL

1

CYC1

c-myc epitope

AOX
1T

pA
p

STOP

F1

f1
or
i

6xHis

P TE

5’

ori

ColE
1

T
C1
CY

Zeoc
in ®

BglII

pPICZ A, B, C
and
pPICZα A, B, C
3.3 kb

P EM7

AOX
1

Blasticid
in

Ampicil
lin

in
rig
2µ o
H4
RS
6/A
CEN

URA3

STOP

BamH I

T

UC

YES™
Vectors

6xHis

Pme I

STOP

ClaI*
PstI*
EcoRI
PmlI
SfiI
BsmBI
Asp718I
KpnI
XhoI
SacII
NotI
XbaI

Asp718I
KpnI
BamHI
BstXI
EcoRI
BstXI
NotI
XhoI
XbaI

Hind III

α-factor

ATG 6xHis Xpress™ Epitope EK Site V5 epitope 6xHis

c-myc epitope

pPICZα A, B, C

Polylinkers for N-terminal tagged vectors

T7

211

T

TRP1

Fig. 11.6 Two specialized vectors for use in Saccharomyces (YES vectors) and Pichia (pPICZ). V5, Express, 6XHis, and c-myc
encode epitopes which can be readily detected and purified by affinity chromatography. The YES vectors offer a choice of 2 µm
origin for high copy or CEN6/ARSH4 origin for low copy in yeast, a choice of URA3 or TRP1 genes for auxotrophic selection on
minimal medium, blasticidin resistance for dominant selection in any strain, and an f1 origin to facilitate DNA sequencing. In the
pPICZ vectors, the zeocin-resistance gene is driven by the EM-7 promoter for selection in E. coli and the TEF1 promoter for selection
in Pichia. More details of these features can be found in Chapter 5. (Figure reproduced courtesy of Invitrogen Corporation.)

212

CHAPTER 11

only a few end up in the growth medium, e.g. the
mating pheromone α factor and the killer toxin. The
remainder, such as invertase and acid phosphatase,
cross the plasma membrane but remain within the
periplasmic space or become associated with the
cell wall.
Polypeptides destined for secretion have a hydrophobic amino-terminal extension, which is responsible for translocation to the endoplasmic reticulum
(Blobel & Dobberstein 1975). The extension is usually
composed of about 20 amino acids and is cleaved
from the mature protein within the endoplasmic
reticulum. Such signal sequences precede the mature
yeast invertase and acid phosphatase sequences.
Rather longer leader sequences precede the mature
forms of the α mating factor and the killer toxin
(Kurjan & Herskowitz 1982, Bostian et al. 1984). The
initial 20 amino acids or so are similar to the conventional hydrophobic signal sequences, but cleavage
does not occur in the endoplasmic reticulum. In the
case of the α factor, which has an 89 amino acid
leader sequence, the first cleavage occurs after a
Lys–Arg sequence at positions 84 and 85 and
happens in the Golgi body (Julius et al. 1983, 1984).
To date, a large number of non-yeast polypeptides
have been secreted from yeast cells containing the
appropriate recombinant plasmid and in almost all
cases the α-factor signal sequence has been used.
There is a perception that S. cerevisiae has a lower
secretory capacity than P. pastoris and other yeasts
(Muller et al. 1998), but the real issue may be
the type of vector used. For example, Parekh et al.
(1996) found that S. cerevisiae strains containing
one stably integrated copy of an expression cassette
secreted more bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor
than strains with the same expression cassette on
a 2 µm multicopy vector. Optimal expression was
obtained with 10 integrated copies. With those proteins which tend to accumulate in the endoplasmic
reticulum as denatured aggregates, secretion may be
enhanced by simultaneously overexpressing chaperons (Shusta et al. 1998). Secretion may also be
enhanced by minor amino acid changes. Katakura
et al. (1999) noted a sixfold increase in lactoglobulin
secretion by conversion of a tryptophan residue to
tyrosine.
Heterologous proteins can be synthesized as
fusions for display on the cell surface of yeast
S. cerevisiae can be used to elucidate and dissect
the function of a protein in a manner similar to

phage-display systems. Either can be used to detect
protein–ligand interactions and to select mutant
proteins with altered binding capacity (Shusta et al.
1999). However, phage-display systems often cannot
display secreted eukaryotic proteins in their native
functional conformation, whereas yeast surface display can.
Yeast surface display makes use of the cell surface
receptor α-agglutinin (Aga), which is a two-subunit
glycoprotein. The 725-residue Aga1p subunit anchors
the assembly to the cell wall via a covalent linkage.
The 69-residue binding subunit (Aga2p) is linked
to Aga1p by two disulfide bonds. To achieve surface
display, the appropriate gene is inserted at the
C terminus of a vector-borne Aga2p gene under the
control of the GAL1 promoter. The construct is
then transformed into a yeast strain carrying a
chromosomal copy of the Aga1p gene, also under
the control of the GAL1 promoter. If the cloned gene
has been inserted in the correct translational reading frame, its gene product will be synthesized as a
fusion with the Aga2p subunit. The fusion product
will associate with the Aga1p subunit within the
secretory pathway and be exported to the cell surface
(Boder & Wittrup 1997). In practice, the gene fusion
is somewhat more complicated. Usually the cloned
gene product is sandwiched between two simple
epitopes to permit quantitation of the number of
fusion proteins per cell and to determine the accessibility of different domains of the fusion protein
(Fig. 11.7).
The methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris is
particularly suited to high-level expression of
recombinant proteins
Organisms that can utilize methanol as a carbon
source are known as methylotrophs and this
designation applies to a number of yeasts such as
Pichia and Candida species. Of the methylotrophs,
Pichia pastoris has found particular favor for the
overproduction of recombinant proteins. There are
three reasons for this (Lin Cereghino & Cregg 2001,
Lin Cereghino et al. 2002, Houard et al. 2002). The
first is that the promoter from the alcohol oxidase
I gene (AOXl) that is used to drive the expression
of foreign genes is extremely efficient and tightly
regulated. The AOXl promoter is strongly repressed
in cells grown on glucose and most other carbon
sources but is induced over 1000-fold if the cells
are shifted to a medium with methanol as the sole
carbon source. Second, the S. cerevisiae MATα signal

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

c-myc
Cloned
gene
product

HA

(b)

Aga2 cassette
A1

R
P

T R P1

s

s

s

CE
N/
ARS

Aga2
s

c-myc

T

HA

MCS

PG

(a)

Aga2

Aga1

i
or

Fig. 11.7 Yeast
surface display of
heterologous proteins.
(a) Schematic
representation of
surface display.
(b) A vector used for
facilitating surface
display. MCS, multiple
cloning site; HA,
hemagglutinin epitope;
c-myc, c-myc epitope.
(See text for details.)

213

Yeast cell wall

peptide can be attached to the protein of interest,
causing it to be exported out of the cell. Interestingly,
this signal sequence may be much more efficient in P.
pastoris than in its native S. cerevisiae. Third, when
organisms like E. coli and S. cerevisiae are grown to
high cell density they have a tendency to switch to
a fermentative mode of growth rather than a respiratory mode. This results in the accumulation of
ethanol and acetic acid and these quickly become
toxic. The rate of accumulation can be reduced by
various cultural manipulations, such as batch feeding of glucose, but the basic problem still persists. By
contrast, P. pastoris can only grow in respiratory
mode on methanol and as a consequence it is possible to achieve cell densities of >100 g/l dry cell
weight (>400 g/l wet cell weight). At these cell densities it is possible to get yields of recombinant proteins of 10–12 g/l, much higher than can be
achieved with S. cerevisiae or E. coli.

Cloning and manipulating large fragments
of DNA
Yeast artificial chromosomes can be used to
clone very large fragments of DNA
When the first YACs were developed it was found
that their segregative stability was determined by
their size. If the size of the YAC was less than 20 kb
then centromere function was impaired whereas
much larger YACs segregated normally. Burke et al.
(1987) made use of this fact in developing a vector
(Fig. 11.3) for cloning large DNA molecules. One
problem with large DNA molecules is that they are
difficult to manipulate in the liquid phase prior
to transformation and keeping them intact is very

Ampicilli

R

n

difficult. Thus, many of the early YAC libraries had
average insert sizes of only 50–100 kb. By removing
small DNA fragments by PFGE fractionation prior to
cloning, Anand et al. (1990) were able to increase
the average insert size to 350 kb. By including polyamines to prevent DNA degradation, Larin et al.
(1991) were able to construct YAC libraries from
mouse and human DNA with average insert sizes
of 700 and 620 kb, respectively. Later, BellannéChantelot et al. (1992) constructed a human library
with an average insert size of 810 kb and with some
inserts as large as 1800 kb. The ability of YACs to
accept such large inserts means that, in principle,
it should be possible for them to carry the very
large genes (>1 Mb) found in higher eukaryotes.
Classical YACs have a number of deficiencies
as vectors
There are a number of operational problems associated with the use of YACs (Kouprina et al. 1994,
Monaco & Larin 1994). The first of these is that it is
estimated that 10–60% of clones in existing libraries
represent chimeric DNA sequences: i.e. sequences
from different regions of the genome cloned into
a single YAC. Chimeras may arise by co-ligation of
DNA inserts in vitro prior to yeast transformation,
or by recombination between two DNA molecules
that were introduced into the same yeast cell. It is
possible to detect chimeras by in situ hybridization of
the YAC to metaphase chromosomes: hybridization
to two or more chromosomes or to geographically
disparate regions of the same chromosome is indicative of a chimera.
A second problem with YACs is that many clones
are unstable and tend to delete internal regions
from their inserts. Using a model system, Kouprina

214

CHAPTER 11

et al. (1994) were able to show that deletions can
be generated both during the transformation process and during mitotic growth of transformants
and that the size of the deletions varied from 20 to
260 kb. Ling et al. (1993) showed that the frequency
of deletion formation could be reduced by use of a
strain rendered recombination-deficient as a result
of a rad52 mutation. However, such strains grow
more slowly and transform less efficiently than RAD
strains and therefore are not ideal hosts for YAC
library construction. Le & Dobson (1997) have shown
that the rad54-3 allele significantly stabilizes YAC
clones containing human satellite DNA sequences.
Strains carrying this allele can undergo meiosis
and have growth and transformation rates comparable with wild-type strains. Heale et al. (1994) have
shown that chimera formation results from the yeast’s
mitotic recombination system, which is stimulated
by the spheroplasting step of the standard YAC transformation system. Transformation of intact yeast
cells is much less recombinogenic. An additional
limitation on the use of YACs is the high rate of loss of
some YACs during mitotic growth.
The third major problem with YAC clones is that
the 15 Mb yeast host chromosome background cannot be separated from the YACs by simple methods,
nor is the yield of DNA very high. Unlike plasmid
vectors in bacteria, YACs have a structure very
similar to natural yeast chromosomes. Thus, purifying YAC DNA from the yeast chromosomes usually
requires separation by PFGE. Alternatively, the entire
yeast genome is subcloned in bacteriophage or cosmid vectors followed by identification of those clones
carrying the original YAC insert.
Circular YACs have a number of advantages
over classical YACs
To overcome the disadvantages of classical YACs,
Cocchia et al. (2000) developed a method to convert linear YACs into circular chromosomes that
also can be propagated in E. coli as bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs). The method involves a
specialised BAC that contains a yeast centromeric
sequence, a marker (G418R) for selection in yeast,
and two sequences homologous to those flanking the
EcoRI site in a standard YAC (pYAC4). These two
sequences are known as hooks and they are separated
by a SalI sequence thereby enabling the BAC to be
linearized (Fig. 11.8). The linearized BAC is electroporated into a yeast cell carrying a standard linear
YAC and recombination results in the generation

of a circular BAC/YAC and loss of the telomeres of
the original YAC. Note that the use of recombination in this application is identical to the principle
of recombinogenic engineering described earlier in
this chapter (p. 207) and in chapter 3 (p. 79).
Circular YACs have a number of advantages over
classical linear YACs. First, they can be separated
easily from linear yeast chromosomes using standard
alkaline lysis methods and are much less susceptible
to shear forces. Thus molecules greater than 250 kb
in size can be isolated intact. Second, circular YACs
exhibit far greater structural stability than linear
YACs and in the size range 100–200 kb have comparable stability to BACs. In the larger size range,
where only YACs provide coverage, up to 40% of the
circular YACs are chimeric but it is possible to isolate
stable clones. Finally, circular YACs up to 250 kb
can be electroporated into E. coli, where they behave
as BACs.
Transformation-associated recombination
(TAR) cloning in yeast permits selective
isolation of large chromosomal fragments
The traditional method for isolating a specific
eukaryotic gene, particularly if it is very large like
the cystic fibrosis gene (230 kb) or the human dystrophin gene (2 Mb), has two disadvantages. First,
it is a time-consuming process to analyze hundreds
of thousands of BAC or YAC clones. Second, since
restriction digestion is used for library construction, a gene may be available in a library only as a
collection of several overlapping fragments that need
to be correctly assembled by recombination between
different YACs or BACs. Transformation-associated
recombination (TAR) cloning (Noskov et al. 2003,
Kouprina & Larionov 2003) is an alternative method
that enables very large genes or chromosomal segments to be selectively and accurately isolated from
genomic DNA.
TAR cloning makes use of circular YACs carrying the S. cerevisiae URA3 gene that is under the
control of the promoter from the Schizosaccharomyces
pombe alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1) gene. This
promoter tolerates the insertion of up to a 130 bp
sequence between the TATA box and the transcription initiation site. In TAR vectors, an insertion is
made that carries hooks that are homologous to
the 3′ and 5′ regions of the gene of interest and which
are separated by a unique restriction site. These
hooks can be as short as 60 bp and since their combined length is less than 130 bp they do not interfere

KA N

BA C

HIS

CEN6

Sal1 digestion

KA N

BA C

HIS

CEN6

Electroporate into yeast cell
carrying a YAC

BAC

Telomere

AMP

HIS

KA N

TRP

URA

Telomere

ars1 CEN4
ars
pYAC4

ars

ars

Recombination

BAC/YAC

Fig. 11.8 Schematic representation of the circularization of a YAC carrying a genomic insert by recombination with a BAC
carrying yeast functional elements. The hooks are shown in purple and gray. The BAC carries the HIS and KAN (G418R) markers
that are selectable in yeast plus the centromeric sequence CEN6 but has no ars sequence. The BAC also has a single recognition site
(shown by arrowhead) for the restriction endonuclease SalI. The BAC cannot replicate in yeast, even if it recyclizes, unless it
acquires an ars.

ARSH4 CEN6

DSB

Hooks

(b) Vector recircularization

(a) Homologous recombination
ARSH4 CEN6

ARSH4 CEN6

Genomic DNA insert

5-FOAR

Fig. 11.9 TAR
cloning of genomic
regions. (See text for
details.)

5-FOAS

(a)

TAR-cloning vector

Marker
CEN
Alu

A specific hook

5’

3’
Alu4

Alu3

Alu2

Alu1

Genomic DNA
(b)
Alu1

Alu2

5’

Alu3

Alu4
3’

A specific hook

Alu

CEN
Marker

TAR-cloning vector

Fig. 11.10 Isolation of the entire copy gene from a complex genome by radial TAR cloning. The TAR vector contains either a 3′
or 5′ gene-specific sequence as one hook and a common repeat as the second hook; hooks are placed at the ends of the linearized
TAR vector. Recombination between the sequences in the vector and the gene-containing fragment(s) leads to isolation of the gene
as a series of circular, overlapping YACs that extend from the unique targeting sequence to various Alu (or Bl) positions. Simply by
changing the orientation of the unique targeting hook, it is possible to clone large regions that extend in both directions from the
specific targeting sequence. Propagation of the YAC in yeast cells depends on acquisition of ars sequences in the cloned genomic
segment. CEN corresponds to the yeast centromere, and Marker is a marker for selection in yeast. Reprinted from Kouprina et al.
Copyright (1998) National Academy of Sciences, USA.

Cloning in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and other fungi

with URA3 expression. To clone the gene of interest,
the circular YAC is linearized and co-transformed
with genomic DNA into yeast spheroplasts (Fig. 11.9).
Clones carrying a genomic insert will have their
URA3 gene disrupted and hence will be resistant to
5-fluoroorotic acid (5-FOA) whereas cells carrying
recircularized vector will be FOA-sensitive.
When DNA sequence information is available
from only one of the flanking regions then a modified
version of TAR cloning, known as radial TAR cloning, can be used. In this variant, one hook is a unique
sequence from the chromosomal region of interest
and the other is a repeated sequence that occurs
frequently and randomly throughout the genomic
DNA. These repeated sequences could be Alu repeats
if human DNA is being cloned, B1 repeats for mouse
DNA cloning, or any other similar repeat motif.
When used in TAR cloning such vectors generate a
series of nested overlapping fragments that extend
from the gene-specific targeting hook to upstream
or downstream Alu or Bl positions in the gene of
interest (Fig. 11.10).
The development of TAR cloning has greatly
facilitated the study of genes and genome structure
in complex genomes (for review, see Kouprina &
Larionov 2003). For example, the technique has been
used to isolate dozens of unique regions and full-size
genes from the DNA of humans, mice, and other
organisms. It also has been used (Kouprina et al.
2003a) to clone centromeric DNA from mammals
which previously had proved refractory to cloning

217

because of its high content of repetitive DNA (see
p. 344). Yet another application has been the cloning of human DNA that is unclonable in bacterial
vectors (Kouprina et al. 2003b).

Suggested reading
Houard S., Heinderyckx M. & Bollen A. (2002)
Engineering of non-conventional yeasts for efficient
synthesis of macromolecules: the methylotrophic
genera. Biochimie 84, 1089–93.
Olsen D., Yang C., Bodo M., et al. Recombinant collagen
and gelatin for drug delivery. Advances in Drug
Delivery 55, 1547–67.
Yokoyama S. (2003) Protein expression systems for
structural genomics and proteomics. Current Opinion
in Chemical Biology 7, 39–43.
Three quite different perspectives on the utility of Pichia
pastoris and its relative merits over other yeasts and
Escherichia coli.
Klinner U. & Schafer B. (2004) Genetic aspects of targeted insertion mutagenesis in yeasts. FEMS
Microbiology Reviews 28, 201–23.
A comprehensive review of a topic that was only discussed
briefly in this chapter.
Kouprina N. & Larionov V. (2003) Exploiting the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the study of the organization and evolution of complex genomes. FEMS
Microbiology Reviews 27, 629–49.
An excellent review that focuses on the use of recombinational cloning techniques to analyze genome structure and
gene expression.

CHAPTER 12
Gene transfer to animal cells

Introduction
The genetic modification of animal cells underlies
many aspects of basic research and applied biotechnology. Techniques are available for the introduction of DNA or RNA into hundreds of different cell
types in culture, and such experiments can be used
to study gene function and regulation, to produce
recombinant proteins and to manipulate the endogenous genome. Mammalian cells are the most
widely used hosts for gene delivery, since they allow
the production of recombinant human proteins with
authentic post-translational modifications that are
not carried out by bacteria, yeast, or plants. Indeed,
mammalian cells are cultured on a commercial scale
for the synthesis of many valuable products, including antibodies, hormones, growth factors, cytokines,
and vaccines. There has been intense research into
the development of efficient vector systems and transformation methods for animal cells, based on viral,
bacterial, and synthetic delivery vectors. Although
this research has concentrated mainly on mammalian cell lines, other systems have also become
popular, such as the baculovirus expression system
which is used in insects.
Research has focused not only on gene-delivery
systems for cultured cells, but also on systems for
gene transfer to animal cells in vivo. The most important application of this technology is in vivo gene therapy, i.e. the introduction of DNA into living human
beings in order to treat disease. Viral gene-delivery
vectors are favored for therapeutic applications
because of their efficiency, but safety concerns have
prompted research into alternative non-viral transfer procedures such as liposome-mediated delivery,
particle bombardment, and ultrasound.
This chapter considers methods for the introduction of DNA into somatic cells, i.e. cells that do not
contribute to the animal germline. Unlike the situation in plants, animal somatic cells are restricted
in their developmental potential and cannot under

normal circumstances be used to generate transgenic
animals. Transformation of the animal germline
requires gene transfer to pluripotent or totipotent
cells, such as eggs, early embryos, isolated germ cells,
or gametes. Exceptionally, germline transformation
can be achieved by the transformation of cultured
cells derived from pluripotent cell lines, such as
murine embryonic stem (ES) cells, or the transfer of
somatic nuclei into enucleated eggs. We consider
these methods for animal germline transformation
in Chapter 13.

There are four major strategies for gene
transfer to animal cells
Gene transfer to animal cells can be achieved using
four broad types of delivery mechanism (Fig. 12.1).
Two of these are described as biological mechanisms
because the target cells need to be infected with a biological delivery vector, such as a virus or bacterium,
which carries the exogenous genetic material. Delivery using a viral vector is known as transduction,
and many different viruses have been adapted as
gene-delivery vectors. The exogenous genetic material, or transgene, is either added to the complete viral
genome or used to replace one or more viral genes.
The transgene is therefore delivered as part of a recombinant viral genome, exploiting the virus’s natural
ability to infect and transfer nucleic acid into animal
cells. Delivery using bacterial vectors is a more recent
development, which in most cases relies on bacteria
which also invade animal cells. In this case, however,
the transgene is delivered not as part of the bacterial genome, but on a plasmid which is carried by
the bacterium. Bacterial gene delivery is sometimes
termed bactofection. The other two delivery mechanisms are described as non-biological because biological delivery vectors are not required. To distinguish
such methods from those involving infection with a
bacterium or virus, the term transfection is used. In

Gene transfer to animal cells

+

+
+

+
+

+

219

methods include microinjection, particle bombardment, ultrasound, and electroporation. Whichever
gene-transfer strategy is chosen, the result is transformation, i.e. a change of the recipient cell’s genotype caused by the acquired transgene. This change
in genotype may be transient or stable, depending
on the type of vector and the fate of the introduced
genetic material.

+

There are several chemical transfection
techniques for animal cells but all are
based on similar principles
The calcium phosphate method involves the
formation of a co-precipitate which is taken
up by endocytosis
Fig. 12.1 The four principal mechanisms by which DNA can
be introduced into animal cells – direct transfer by physical
transfection, chemical-mediated transfection in which the cell
is persuaded to take up DNA by endocytosis, introduction of
DNA packaged inside a virus (transduction), and introduction
of DNA packaged inside a bacterium (bactofection).

chemical transfection methods, cells are persuaded to
take up DNA from their surroundings when the DNA
is presented as a synthetic complex – either a complex with an overall positive charge, allowing it to
interact with the negatively charged cell membrane
and promote uptake by endocytosis; or a lipophilic
complex which fuses with the membrane and
deposits the transgene directly into the cytoplasm
(Fig. 12.2). In physical transfection methods, naked
DNA is introduced directly into the cell by exploiting
a physical force. Examples of physical transfection

Fig. 12.2 The introduction of DNA into animal cells by
chemical transfection involves the formation of a complex
that facilitates interactions with the plasma membrane of the
cell. This can be via electrostatic attraction or the fusion of
lipophilic vesicles. In contrast, physical transfection involves
direct transfer through the cell membrane, although the DNA
may be complexed to protect it from shear forces.

The ability of mammalian cells to take up exogenous
DNA from the culture medium was first reported
by Szybalska & Szybalski (1962). They used total
uncloned genomic DNA to transfect human cells
deficient for the enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT). Rare HPRT-positive
cells, which had presumably taken up fragments of
DNA containing the functional gene, were identified
by selection on HAT medium (p. 225). At this time,
the actual mechanism of DNA uptake was not understood. Much later, it was appreciated that successful
DNA transfer in such experiments was dependent
on the formation of a fine DNA/calcium phosphate
co-precipitate, which first settles onto the cells and is
then internalized. The precipitate must be formed
freshly at the time of transfection. It is thought that
small granules of calcium phosphate associated with
DNA are taken up by endocytosis. The DNA then
escapes and some reaches the nucleus and can be
expressed (Orrantia & Cheng 1990, Jordan & Wurm
2004). The technique became generally accepted
after Graham & van der Erb (1973) used calcium
phosphate to increase the infectivity of adenovirus
DNA. It is now established as a general method for
the introduction of DNA into a wide range of cell
types in culture. However, since the precipitate
must coat the cells, this method is suitable for cells
growing in monolayers or in suspension, but not
those growing as clumps.
As originally described, calcium phosphate transfection was limited by the variable and rather low
proportion of cells that took up DNA (1–2%). Only a
small number of these would be stably transformed.
Improvements to the method have increased the

220

CHAPTER 12

transfection frequency up to 20% for some cell lines
(Chu & Sharp 1981). A variant of the technique,
using a different buffer system, allows the precipitate
to form slowly over a number of hours, and this
can increase stable transformation efficiency by up
to 100-fold when using high-quality plasmid DNA
(Chen & Okayama 1987, 1988). Even so, particle
size is the most important parameter for successful
transfection and is difficult to control, since it is
dependent on the concentrations of DNA, calcium
and phosphate, the pH of the medium, the presence
of medium additives, and the mixing technique
(Jordan & Wurm 2004).
Transfection with polyplexes is more efficient
because of the uniform particle size
The calcium phosphate method is applicable to many
cell types, but some cell lines are adversely affected
by the co-precipitate due to its toxicity and are hence
difficult to transfect. Alternative chemical transfection methods have been developed to address this
problem using polycationic compounds that form
soluble complexes ( polyplexes) through spontaneous
electrostatic interactions with DNA. The earliest of
these methods utilized DEAE-dextran (diethylaminoethyl dextran), a soluble polycationic carbohydrate.
This technique was initially devised to introduce viral
RNA and DNA into cells (Pagano & Vaheri 1965,
McCutchan & Pagano 1968) but was later adapted
as a method for plasmid DNA transfer (Milman &
Herzberg 1981). The efficiency of the original procedure was improved by Lopata et al. (1984) and
Sussman & Milman (1984) by adding after-treatments
such as osmotic shock1 or exposure to chloroquine,
the latter having been shown to inhibit the acidification of endosomal vesicles (Luthmann & Magnusson
1983). Although efficient for the transient transfection of many cell types, DEAE-dextran cannot be
used to generate stably transformed cell lines and
has thus fallen out of favor.
A new generation of polycationic compounds
has been developed more recently, which are more
versatile and can be used for the stable transformation not only of proliferating cell lines but also of
primary cells and post-mitotic cells such as neurons
and myocytes (Davis 2002). Simple, linear compounds such as poly-L-lysine and spermine have been
1

Osmotic shock is also used with calcium phosphate transfection, lipofection, and electroporation to increase transfection
efficiencies.

successful with some cell types, but more progress
has been made with synthetic polyamines, polyethylenimines (PEIs), and dendrimers (Boussif et al. 1995,
Abdallah et al. 1996, Tang et al. 1996, KukowskaLatallo et al. 1996). Polyamines are organic molecules
carrying multiple amine groups, which increase the
number of positive charges available for interactions
with DNA. PEIs are linear or branched hydrocarbon
chains with nitrogens at every third position, maximizing the available positive charges. Dendrimers
are highly complex molecules, built in layers from a
central initiator such as ammonia or ethylenediamine
to adopt an overall spherical or star-like geometry
with multiple internal and external amine groups.
Their shape, size, and chemical properties can be
controlled precisely, facilitating the formation of
homogeneous DNA complexes. Many proprietary
polyplex-forming agents are available commercially
and a small selection is shown in Table 12.1.
As well as increasing the efficiency of gene transfer
in cultured cells, polyplexes can also be used for in
vivo gene transfer. For this to be successful, precise
control over transgene expression is required. Recent
developments in polymer technology provide a novel
solution – controlling the physical and chemical
properties of the gene-delivery vehicle itself to regulate transgene expression (Yokoyama 2002). The
basis of these developments is that some polymers
change their properties in response to a physical
stimulus. For example, Nagasaki et al. (2000) have
described a synthetic polymer whose affinity to DNA
changes upon exposure to UV light. The polymer
is based on azobenzene, and the azo moiety undergoes trans-to-cis isomerism following UV irradiation,
causing DNA to be released from the complex. In
cultured cells, exposure to UV light increases transfection efficiency by up to 50%. Polymeric complexes
responsive to UV light have limited use for gene
therapy because it would be difficult to illuminate
internal organs. However, another synthetic complex has been described that is responsive to heat
(Kurisawa et al. 2000a,b, Yokoyama et al. 2001).
This polymer is based on N-isopropylacrylamide
(PIPAAm) and undergoes a phase transition at a
lower critical solution temperature of 32°C. Below
32°C, the polymer is hydrophilic and soluble, and
forms a loose complex with DNA. Above 32°C, the
polymer is hydrophobic and compact, and forms a
tight complex by aggregation. A tight complex is
preferable for DNA delivery because it is suitable
for uptake and resistant to nucleases, whereas a
loose complex is better for transcription because it

221

Gene transfer to animal cells

Table 12.1 Some cationic lipid and cationic polymer transfection reagents.

Reagent or reagent family
CellFectin
CLONfectin
CytoFectene
Cytofectin GS
CytoPure
DOSPAR
DOTAP
Effectegene
Escort family
ExGen family
FluoroFectin family
FuGENE 6
GeneJammer
GeneJuice
GeneLimo family
GenePORTER family
GeneSHUTTLE family
Genetransfer
GenFect
jetPEI
LipofectAMINE family
Lipofectin
LipoGen
LipoTaxi
LipoVec
MaxFect
Metafectene
PolyethylenimineTransferrinfection
PolyFect
SuperFect
SureFECTOR
Targetfect F1
Targetfect F2 and F4
Tfx family
TransFAST
Transfectam
TransFectin
TransIT family*
TransIT-Insecta
TransMessenger
UniFECTOR
X-tremeGENE family

Composition, if known

Supplier

Cationic lipopolyamine
Cationic lipid
Cationic lipid
Cationic lipid
Cationic polymer, biodegradable
Polycationic lipid
Cationic lipid
Nonliposomal lipid
Cationic lipids
Polyethylenimine
DOTAP, neutral lipid and
fluorescent tracer
Nonliposomal lipid
Polyamine
Polyamine
Polycationic lipid and helper

Invitrogen
BD Biosciences/CLONTECH
Amersham
Glen Research
Qbiogene
Roche Applied Science
Roche Applied Science
Qiagen
Sigma Aldritch
MBI Fermentas
Qbiogene

Polycationic lipids
Cationic liposome
Cationic lipid
Polyethylenimine
Polycationic lipid
DOTMA and DOPE
Nonliposomal lipid
Cationic lipid
Cationic phosphonolipid mix
Cationic lipid
Cationic lipid
Polyethylenimine
Dendrimer
Dendrimer
Cationic lipid and neutral lipid
Cationic lipid
Cationic polymer
Cationic lipids
Cationic lipid
Cationic lipids
Cationic lipid
Polyamine
Cationic lipid
Polyationic lipid and neutral lipid

facilitates access by transcription factors. Therefore,
at normal body temperatures the DNA complex may
be taken up efficiently by all cells, but poorly expressed. Local cooling, e.g. through the application
of ice to the body surface or the use of catheters, can

Roche Applied Science
Strategene
Novagen
CPG
Gene Therapy Systems
Qbiogene
Wako
MoleculA
Qbiogene
Invitrogen
Invitrogen
InvivoGen
Strategene
InvivoGen
MoleculA
Biontex
Bender MedSystems
Qiagen
Qiagen
B-Bridge International
Targeting Systems
Targeting Systems
Promega
Promega
Promega
Bio-Rad
Pan Vera Corp
Pan Vera Corp
Qiagen
B-Bridge International
Roche Applied Science

then induce gene expression in specific tissues or
organs. The properties of the polymer can be modified by increasing the proportion of hydrophobic or
hydrophilic chemical groups, thus lowering or raising the transition temperature, respectively.

222

CHAPTER 12

Transfection can also be achieved using
liposomes and lipoplexes
An alternative chemical transfection procedure is
to package DNA inside a fusogenic phosopholipid
vesicle, which interacts with the target cell membrane and facilitates DNA uptake. The first example
of this approach was provided by Schaffner (1980),
who used bacterial protoplasts containing plasmids
to transfer DNA into mammalian cells. Briefly, bacterial cells were transformed with a suitable plasmid
vector and then treated with chloramphenicol to
amplify the plasmid copy number. Lysozyme was
used to remove the cell walls, and the resulting protoplasts were gently centrifuged onto a monolayer
of mammalian cells and induced to fuse with them
using polyethylene glycol. A similar strategy was
employed by Wiberg et al. (1987), who used the
hemoglobin-free ghosts of erythrocytes as delivery
vehicles. The procedures are very efficient in terms
of the number of transformants obtained, but they
are also labor-intensive and so have not been widely
adopted as a general transfection method. However, an important advantage is that they are gentle,
allowing the transfer of large DNA fragments without shearing. Yeast cells with the cell wall removed
(spheroplasts) have therefore been used to introduce YAC DNA into mouse ES cells by this method,
for the production of YAC transgenic mice (see
Chapter 13).
More widespread use has been made of artificial
phospholipid vesicles, which are called liposomes
(Schaefer-Ridder et al. 1982). Initial liposome-based
procedures were hampered by the difficulty encountered in encapsulating the DNA, and the transfection
efficiency was no better than that of the calcium
phosphate method. However, a breakthrough came
with the discovery that cationic/neutral lipid mixtures can spontaneously form stable complexes with
DNA (lipoplexes) that interact productively with the
cell membrane, resulting in DNA uptake by endocytosis (Felgner et al. 1987, 1994). This low-toxicity
transfection method, commonly known as lipofection, is one of the simplest to perform and is applicable to many cell types that are difficult to transfect by
other means, including primary cells and cells growing in suspension (e.g. Ruysscharet et al. 1994).
The technique facilitates transient and stable transformation, and is sufficiently gentle to be used with
YACs and other large DNA fragments. The efficiency
is also much higher than that of other chemical
transfection methods – up to 90% of cells in a culture

dish can be transfected. A large number of proprietary lipid mixtures is available, varying in efficiency
for different cell lines (Table 12.1). A useful feature
of liposome and lipoplex gene-delivery vehicles is
their ability to transform cells in live animals following injection into target tissues or even the bloodstream. Transfection efficiency has been improved
and targeting to specific cell types achieved by combining liposomes and lipoplexes with viral proteins
that promote cell fusion, nuclear targeting signals,
and various molecular conjugates that recognize
specific cell-surface molecules. The development
of liposomes for gene therapy and the determination of important parameters for efficient transfection have been comprehensively reviewed (Scheule
& Cheng 1996, Tseng & Huang 1998, Rose & Hui
1999).

Physical transfection techniques have
diverse mechanisms
Electroporation and ultrasound create
transient pores in the cell
Electroporation is a physical transfection technique
which involves the generation of transient, nanometer-sized pores in the cell membrane, by exposing
cells to a brief pulse of electricity. DNA enters the
cell through these pores, and is transported to the
nucleus. This technique was first applied to animal
cells by Wong & Neumann (1982), who successfully
introduced plasmid DNA into mouse fibroblasts.
The electroporation technique has been adapted to
many other cell types (Potter et al. 1984). The most
critical parameters are the intensity and duration
of the electric pulse, and these must be determined
empirically for different cell types. However, once
optimal electroporation parameters have been established, the method is simple to carry out and highly
reproducible. The technique has high input costs
because a specialized capacitor discharge machine
is required that can accurately control pulse length
and amplitude (Potter 1988). Additionally, larger
numbers of cells may be required than for other
methods because in many cases, the most efficient
electroporation occurs when there is up to 50%
cell death.
Electroporation can also be used as a method for in
vivo gene transfer, particularly for surface or nearsurface tissues such as skin, muscle, and certain
tumors (Bigley et al. 2002). This can be achieved

Gene transfer to animal cells

by the direct application of electrodes to the skin
following shaving and mild abrasion (Dujardin et al.
2001), although DNA is generally injected into
the skin or muscle before the application of the
electric field (Aihara et al. 1998, Rols et al. 1998).
In combination with conventional needle injection,
electroporation can also be used to introduce DNA
into internal organs, such as the liver. In this case,
gene transfer is achieved through the use of needle
electrodes (Heller et al. 1996).
Ultrasound transfection involves the exposure of
cells to a rapidly oscillating probe, such as the tip of a
sonicator (Mitragotri et al. 1996, Wyber et al. 1997).
The transfection mechanism is similar in some ways
to electroporation in that the application of ultrasound waves to a dish of cells or a particular tissue
results in the formation and collapse of bubbles in
the liquid, including the cell membrane, a process
known as cavitation. The transient appearance of
such cavities allows DNA to cross the membrane into
the cytoplasm. It has been shown that the application of low-frequency ultrasound allows the efficient
delivery of nucleic acids into mammalian cells both
in vitro and in vivo, because the plasmid DNA is left
structurally intact. Furthermore, ultrasound-mediated
gene delivery raises no safety concerns because the
ultrasound waves appear to have no adverse effects
when focused on different anatomic locations in
the human body. Gene transfer in vivo is generally
achieved by injection followed by the application of a
focused ultrasound device.
Other physical transfection methods pierce
the cell membrane and introduce DNA directly
into the cell
Another group of transfection methods involves
the direct transfer of DNA into the cell, without a synthetic carrier. One such procedure is microinjection,
a technique that is guaranteed to generate successful
hits on target cells but that can only be applied to
a few cells in any one experiment. This technique
has been applied to cultured cells that are recalcitrant to other transfection methods (Capecchi 1980,
Greassmann & Graessmann 1983), but its principle
use is to introduce DNA and other molecules into
large cells, such as oocytes, eggs, and the cells of early
embryos, as discussed in Chapter 13. For in vivo
applications, conventional needle injection appears
to be an efficient way to transfer DNA into target
cells. The DNA can be injected directly into tissues
such as skin, muscle, or internal organs (Wolff et al.

223

1990), or it can be injected into the blood. In the
latter case, because the DNA is rapidly degraded, a
hydrodynamic gene-transfer method has been devised
which involves the transfer of a large amount of
DNA into the bloodstream in a small volume of saline
(Liu & Knapp 2002).
Particle bombardment is another direct delivery
method, initially developed for the transformation
of plants (Chapter 14). This involves coating small
metal particles with DNA and then accelerating
them into target tissues using a powerful force, such
as a blast of high-pressure gas or an electric discharge
through a water droplet (O’Brien & Lummis 2004).
In animals, this technique is most often used to
transfect multiple cells in tissue slices rather than
cultured cells (e.g. Lo et al. 1994, Arnold et al. 1994)
but it has also been used to transfect cells in culture
(e.g. Burkholder et al. 1993). Particle bombardment
has most recently been adapted as a method for the
transfer of DNA into skin cells in vivo (Haynes et al.
1996, Roy et al. 2001).

Cells can be transfected with either
replicating or non-replicating DNA
The transformation of animal cells occurs in two
stages, the first involving the introduction of DNA
into the cell (the transfection stage), and the second
involving its incorporation into the nucleus, often by
integration into the host chromosome. Transfection
is much more efficient than integration, hence a
large proportion of transfected cells never integrate
the foreign DNA they contain. The DNA is maintained in the nucleus in an extrachromosomal state
and, assuming it does not contain an origin of replication that functions in the host cell, it persists for
just a short time before it is diluted and degraded.
This is known as transient transformation (the term
transient transfection is also used) reflecting the fact
that the properties of the cell are changed by the
introduced transgene, but only for a short duration.
In a small proportion of transfected cells, the DNA
will integrate into the genome, forming a new
genetic locus that will be inherited by all clonal
descendants. This is known as stable transformation,
and results in the formation of a “cell line” carrying
and expressing the transgene. Since integration is
such an inefficient process, the rare stably transformed
cells must be isolated from the large background of
non-transformed and transiently transformed cells
by selection.

224

CHAPTER 12

Three types of selectable marker have been
developed for animal cells
Endogenous selectable markers are already
present in the cellular genome, and mutant
cell lines are required when they are used
Following the general acceptance of the calcium
phosphate transfection method, it was shown that
mouse cells deficient for the enzyme thymidine
kinase (TK) could be stably transformed to a wildtype phenotype by transfecting them with the herpes
simplex virus (HSV) Tk gene (Wigler et al. 1977). As
for the HPRT+ transformants discussed earlier in the
chapter, cells positive for TK can be selected on HAT
medium. This is because both enzymes are required
Salvage
pathway

Salvaged bases
and nucleosides

for nucleotide biosynthesis via the salvage pathway
(Fig. 12.3). In mammals, nucleotides are produced
via two alternative routes, the de novo and salvage
pathways. In the de novo pathway, nucleotides are
synthesized from basic precursors such as sugars
and amino acids, while the salvage pathway recycles
nucleotides from DNA and RNA. If the de novo
pathway is blocked, nucleotide synthesis becomes
dependent on the salvage pathway, and this can be
exploited for the selection of cells carrying functional
Hprt and Tk genes. The drug aminopterin blocks the
de novo synthesis of both inosine monophosphate
(IMP) and thymidine monophosphate (TMP) by
inhibiting key enzymes in the de novo pathway. Cells
exposed to aminopterin can thus survive only if they
have functional Hprt and Tk genes and a source of
De novo
pathway

Nucleotides

De novo source

APRT

Adenine

AK

AMP

Purines

Adenosine
(Aminopterin, methotrexate)

Inosine

DHFR
Hypoxanthine
Xanthine

Guanine

HPRT

IMP
IMPDH (Mycophenolic acid)

XGPRT (bacterial)
XMP
HPRT

GMP

Pyrimidines

CTP

Thymidine

Deoxyuracil

Glycine +
deoxyribose

TK

TK

UTP

TMP
DNFR
(Aminopterin,
methotrexate)
dUMP

CAD
UDP

Aspartate +
deoxyribose

(PALA)

Fig. 12.3 Simplified representation of the de novo and salvage nucleotide synthesis pathways. Top panel: purine synthesis. De
novo purine nucleotide synthesis (shown on the right) initially involves the formation of inosine monophosphate (IMP) which is
then converted into either adenosine monophosphate (AMP) or, via xanthine monophosphate (XMP), guanosine monophosphate
(GMP). The de novo synthesis of IMP requires the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), whose activity can be blocked by
aminopterin or methotrexate. In the presence of such inhibitors, cell survival depends on nucleotide salvage, as shown on the left.
Cells lacking one of the essential salvage enzymes, such as HPRT or APRT, therefore cannot survive in the presence of aminopterin
or methotrexate unless they are transformed with a functional copy of the corresponding gene. Thus, the genes encoding salvagepathway enzymes can be used as selectable markers. Note that the enzyme XGPTR, which converts xanthine to XMP, is found only
in bacterial cells and not in animals. Bottom panel: pyrimidine synthesis. De novo pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis (shown on the
right) initially involves the formation of uridine diphosphate (UDP). This step requires a multifunctional enzyme, CAD, whose
activity can be blocked by N-phosphonacetyl-l-aspartate (PALA). UDP is then converted into either thymidine monophosphate
(TMP) or cytidine triphosphate (CTP), the latter via uridine triphospate (UTP). De novo TMP synthesis requires DHFR, so the
reaction can be blocked in the same way as in de novo purine synthesis, making cell survival dependent on the salvage enzyme
thymidine kinase (TK). Thus, the Tk gene can be used as a selectable marker. There is no salvage pathway for CTP.

225

Gene transfer to animal cells

Table 12.2 Commonly used endogenous selectable marker genes. Most of these markers are involved in the redundant
endogenous nucleotide biosynthetic pathways (Fig. 12.3). They can also be used as counterselectable markers. For
example, negative selection for TK activity is achieved using toxic thymidine analogs (e.g. 5-bromodeoxyuridine, ganciclovir),
which are incorporated into DNA only if there is TK activity in the cell.

Marker

Product

Selection

References

Ada

Adenosine deaminase

Xyl-A (9-b-D-xylofuranosyl adenosine) and
2′-deoxycoformycin

Kaufman et al. 1986

Aprt

Adenine
phosphoribosyltransferase

Adenine plus azaserine, to block de novo
dATP synthesis

Lester et al. 1980

Cad

Multifunctional enzyme

PALA (N-phosphonacetyl-L-aspartate)
inhibits the aspartate transcarbamylase
activity of CAD*

De Saint-Vincent et al.
1981

Hprt

Hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase

Hypoxanthine and aminopterin, to block
de novo IMP synthesis
Selected on HAT medium

Lester et al. 1980

Tk

Thymidine kinase

Thymidine and aminopterin to block de
novo dTTP synthesis
Selected on HAT medium

Wigler et al. 1977

*CAD: carbamyl phosphate synthetase/aspartate transcarbamylase/dihydroorotase.

hypoxanthine and thymidine. Hprt+ and Tk+ transformants can therefore both be selected using HAT
medium, which contains hypoxanthine, aminopterin,
and thymidine.
In these early experiments, the transgene of
interest conferred a selectable phenotype on the cell.
However, most genes do not generate a conveniently
selectable phenotype, and the isolation of transformants in such experiments was initially problematic.
A breakthrough was made when it was discovered
that transfection with two physically unlinked DNAs
resulted in co-transformation, i.e. the integration of
both transgenes into the genome (Wigler et al. 1979).
To obtain co-transformants, cultured cells were transfected with the HSV Tk gene and a vast excess of
well-defined DNA, such as the plasmid pBR322. Cells
selected on HAT medium were then tested by Southern
blot hybridization for the presence of the non-selected
plasmid DNA. Wigler and colleagues found evidence for the presence of non-selected DNA in nearly
90% of the TK+ cells, indicating that the HSV Tk gene
could be used as a selectable marker. In subsequent
experiments, it was shown that the initially unlinked
donor DNA fragments were incorporated into large
concatemeric structures up to 2 Mbp in length prior
to integration (Perucho et al. 1980).
The phenomenon of co-transformation allows the
stable introduction of any foreign DNA sequence
into mammalian cells as long as a selectable marker is introduced at the same time. The HSV Tk

gene is representative of a class of genes known as
endogenous markers, because they confer a property
that is already present in wild-type cells. A number
of such markers have been used, all of which act in
redundant metabolic pathways (Table 12.2).
There is no competing activity for dominant
selectable markers
The major disadvantage of endogenous markers is
that they can only be used with mutant cell lines in
which the corresponding host gene is non-functional.
This restricts the range of cells that can be transfected.
Endogenous markers have therefore been largely
superseded by so-called dominant selectable markers,
which confer a phenotype that is entirely novel to the
cell and can hence be used in any cell type. Such markers are usually drug-resistance genes of bacterial
origin, and transformed cells are selected on a medium
that contains the drug at an appropriate concentration.
For example, E. coli transposons Tn5 and Tn601
contain distinct genes encoding neomycin phosphotransferase, whose expression confers resistance to
aminoglycoside antibiotics (kanamycin, neomycin,
and G418). These are protein synthesis inhibitors,
active against bacterial and eukaryotic cells, and can
therefore be used for selection in either bacteria or
animals. By attaching the selectable marker to the
SV40 early promoter (Berg 1981) or the HSV Tk promoter (Colbère-Garapin et al. 1981), which function

226

CHAPTER 12

Table 12.3 Commonly used dominant selectable marker genes in animals (see Box 14.2 for selectable markers used in
plants).

Marker

Principles of selection

Product (and source)

References

as

Asparagine synthase
(Escherichia coli )

Toxic glutamine analog albizziin

Andrulis & Siminovitch
1981

ble

Glycopeptide-binding protein
(Streptoalloteichus hindustantus)

Confers resistance to glycopeptide
antibiotics bleomycin, pheomycin,
Zeocin™

Genilloud et al. 1984

bsd

Blasticidin deaminase
(Aspergillus terreus)

Confers resistance to basticidin S

Izumi et al. 1991

gpt

Guanine-xanthine
phosphoribosyltransferase
(E. coli)

Analogous to Hprt in mammals, but
possesses additional xanthine
phosphoribosyltransferase activity,
allowing survival in medium
containing aminopterin and
mycophenolic acid (Fig. 12.1)

Mulligan & Berg 1981b

hisD

Histidinol dehydrogenase
(Salmonella typhimurium)

Confers resistance to histidinol

Mantei et al. 1979

hpt

Hygromycin
phosphotransferase (E. coli )

Confers resistance to hygromycin-B

Blochlinger &
Diggelmann 1984

neo (nptII)

Neomycin phosphotransferase Confers resistance to aminoglycoside
antibiotics (e.g. neomycin, kanamycin,
(E. coli)
G418)

pac

Puromycin N-acetyltransferase
(Streptomyces alboniger)

Confers resistance to puromycin

Vara et al. 1986

trpB

Tryptophan synthesis (E. coli)

Confers resistance to indole

Hartman & Mulligan
1988

in many cell types, neomycin phosphotransferase
was shown to confer antibiotic resistance in a variety
of non-mutant cell lines. This marker continues to
be used in many contemporary expression vectors.
The power of aminoglycoside antibiotic resistance as
a selective system in eukaryotes is now very evident.
It also has applications in yeast (Chapter 11) and
plants (Chapter 14). Other commonly used dominant selectable markers are listed in Table 12.3.
Some marker genes facilitate stepwise
transgene amplification
If animal cells are exposed to toxic concentrations
of certain drugs, rare individual cells can survive
because they have spontaneously undergone a
mutation that confers resistance to that drug. The
first such compound to be investigated in this manner was the folic acid analog methotrexate, which is
a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme dihydrofolate

Colbère-Garapin et al.
1981

reductase (DHFR). The analysis of surviving cells
showed that some had undergone point mutations
in the Dhfr locus, producing an enzyme with resistance to the inhibitor. Others had undergone mutations in other loci, for example preventing the uptake
of the drug. The most interesting group comprised
those cells that had survived by amplifying the
Dhfr locus, therefore providing enough enzyme to
out-compete the inhibitor (Schimke et al. 1978).
This type of amplification mutation is useful because
the drug dose can be progressively increased, resulting in the stepwise selection of cells with massively
amplified Dhfr gene arrays. Such cells can survive in
media containing methotrexate concentrations up
to 10,000 times higher than the nominal dose lethal
to wild-type cells. The amplified loci are often maintained within the chromosome as extended homogeneously staining regions, or alternatively as small
extra chromosomes called double minutes.
Cells with high copy numbers of the Dhfr locus

227

Gene transfer to animal cells

are not generated in response to methotrexate
exposure, but arise randomly in the population and
are selected on the basis of their resistance to the
drug. The random nature of the amplification is
confirmed by the fact that, as well as the Dhfr gene
itself, extensive regions of flanking DNA are also
amplified, even though they confer no advantage
on the cell. This phenomenon can be exploited to
co-amplify transgenes introduced along with a Dhfr
marker gene, resulting in high-level expression.
Wigler et al. (1980) demonstrated this principle by
transfecting methotrexate-sensitive mouse cells with
genomic DNA from the methotrexate-resistant cell
line A29, which contains multiple copies of an altered
Dhfr gene. They linearized the A29 genomic DNA with
the restriction enzyme SalI, and ligated it to SalIlinearized pBR322 DNA prior to transfection. Following stepwise drug selection of the transformed cells,
Southern blot hybridization showed that the amount
of pBR322 DNA had increased more than 50-fold.
Methotrexate selection has been used for the largescale expression of many recombinant proteins,
including tissue plasminogen activator (Kaufman

et al. 1985), hepatitis B surface antigen (Patzer et al.
1986), and clotting factor VIII (Kaufman et al. 1988).
CHO cells are preferred as hosts for this expression
system because of the availability of a number of dhfr
mutants (Urlaub et al. 1983). In non-mutant cell
lines, non-transformed cells can survive selection by
amplifying the endogenous Dhfr genes, generating a
background of “false positives”. Alternative strategies
have been developed that allow DHFR selection to be
used in wild-type cells. Expressing the Dhfr marker
using a strong constitutive promoter (Murray et al.
1983) or using a methotrexate-resistant allele of the
mouse gene (Simonsen & Levinson 1983) allows selection at methotrexate concentrations much higher
than wild-type cells can tolerate. The E. coli dhfr gene
is also naturally resistant to methotrexate, although
for this reason it cannot be used for amplifiable selection (O’Hare et al. 1981). Another useful strategy is
to employ a second marker gene, such as neo, allowing non-transformed cells to be eliminated using
G418 (Kim & Wold 1985). Although dhfr is the most
widely used amplifiable marker, many others have
been evaluated, as shown in Table 12.4.

Table 12.4 Common markers used for in situ gene amplification. Many amplifiable markers can also be used as
endogenous or dominant selectable markers, but, in some cases, the drug used for amplification may not be the same
as that used for standard selection.

Marker

Product

Amplifying selective drug

References

Ada

Adenosine deaminase

Deoxycoformycin

Kaufman et al. 1986

as

Asparagine synthase

b-Aspartylhydroxamate

Cartier et al. 1987

Cad

Aspartate transcarbamylase

N-Phosphonacetyl-L-aspartate

Wahl et al. 1984

Dhfr

Dihydrofolate reductase

Methotrexate

Kaufman et al. 1985

gpt

Xanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase

Mycophenolic acid

Chapman et al. 1983

GS

Glutamine synthase

Methionine sulphoxamine

Cockett et al. 1990

Hprt

Hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase

Aminopterin

Kanalas & Suttle 1984

Impdh

Inosine monophosphate
dehydrogenase

Mycophenolic acid

Collart & Huberman 1987

Mt-1

Metallothionein 1

Cd2+

Beach & Palmiter 1981

M

Multidrug resistance: Pglycoprotein 170 gene

Adriamycin, colchicine, others

Kane et al. 1988

Odc

Ornithine decarboxylase

Difluoromethylornithine

Chiang & McConlogue 1988

Tk

Thymidine kinase

Aminopterin

Roberts & Axel 1982

Umps

Uridine monophosphate synthases

Pyrazofurin

Kanalas & Suttle 1984

res

228

CHAPTER 12

Plasmid vectors for the transfection of
animal cells contain modules from bacterial
and animal genes

and marker remain linked when they co-integrate
into the recipient cell’s genome. A range of pSV and
pRSV vectors was developed containing alternative
selectable marker genes, e.g. pSV2-neo (Southern &
Berg 1982), pSV2-gpt (Mulligan & Berg 1980), and
pSV2-dhfr (Subramani et al. 1981). (iv) As discussed
below, some plasmid vectors for gene transfer to
animal cells are designed to be shuttle vectors, i.e.
they contain origins of replication functional in
animal cells allowing the vector to be maintained as
an episomal replicon.

Stable transformation by integration can be achieved
using any source of DNA. The early gene-transfer
experiments discussed above were carried out using
complex DNA mixtures, e.g. genomic DNA, bacterial
plasmids, and phage. Calcium phosphate transfection was used in most of these experiments, and the
specific donor DNA was often bulked up with a nonspecific carrier such as cleaved salmon sperm DNA.
However, it is generally more beneficial to use a
purified source of the donor transgene. This principle
was originally demonstrated by Wigler et al. (1977)
who transfected cultured mouse cells with a homogeneous preparation of the HSV Tk gene. Later, this
gene was cloned in E. coli plasmids to provide a more
convenient source. The use of plasmid vectors for
transfection provides numerous other advantages,
depending on the modular elements included on the
plasmid backbone. (i) The convenience of bacterial
plasmid vectors can be extended to animal cells,
in terms of the ease of subcloning, in vitro manipulation, and purification of recombinant proteins
(Chapter 5). (ii) More importantly, modular elements can be included to drive transgene expression,
and these can be used with any transgene of interest. The pSV and pRSV plasmids are examples of
early expression vectors for use in animal cells,
containing transcriptional control sequences from
SV40 and Rous sarcoma virus which are functional
in a wide range of cell types. The incorporation of
these sequences into pBR322 generated convenient
expression vectors in which any transgene could
be controlled by these promoters when integrated
into the genome of a transfected cell (Fig. 12.4). (iii)
The inclusion of a selectable marker gene obviates
the need for co-transformation, since the transgene
late

p

One application in which the use of plasmid vectors
is critical is transient transformation. Here, the goal
is to exploit the short-term persistence of extrachromosomal DNA. Such experiments have a variety of
uses, including transient assays of gene expression
and the recovery of moderate amounts of recombinant protein. Generally, transient transformation
is used as a test system, e.g. to assay regulatory elements using reporter genes (Box 12.1), to check the
correct function of an expression construct before
going to the expense of generating stable cell lines, or
to recover moderate amounts of recombinant protein
for verification purposes. Transient transformation
is particularly useful for testing large numbers of
alternative constructs in parallel. No regime of
selection is required because stable cell lines are
not recovered – the cells are generally transfected,
assayed after one or two days, and then discarded.
The simplest way to achieve the transient transformation of animal cells is to use a plasmid vector
lacking an origin of replication functional in the host.
Although the vector cannot replicate, gene expression from a mammalian transcription unit is possible
for as long as the plasmid remains stable, which
late

SV
40

SV
4

r

am

am

r

Non-replicating plasmid vectors persist for a
short time in an extrachromosomal state

p

po

lyA

AAAA

SV40 small
T intron

SV40 small
T intron

pSV2-dhfr
(5.0 kb)

lyA

po
AAAA

0

pRSV-neo
(5.6 kb)

ori

ori

PE

PLTR

fr
dh
SV40 ori

LTR

5
Tn

g
ne

Fig. 12.4 The
mammalian plasmid
expression vectors
pSV2-dhfr and pRSV-neo.

Gene transfer to animal cells

229

Box 12.1 Reporter genes and promoter analysis
Reporter genes are also known as screenable
marker genes. These differ from selectable
marker genes in that they do not confer a
property that allows transformed cells to
survive under selective conditions. Instead,
they encode a product that can be detected
using a simple and inexpensive assay.
When controlled by a strong constitutive
promoter, reporter genes are often used as
markers to confirm transient or stable
transformation, since only cells containing
the reporter-gene construct can express
the corresponding protein. Importantly, the
assays used to detect reporter-gene activity
are quantitative, so they can also be used to
measure transformation efficiency. If attached
to a cloned promoter, reporter genes can
therefore be used to determine transcriptional
activity in different cell types and under
different conditions. Transient reporter assays
have been widely used to characterize and
dissect the regulatory elements driving
eukaryotic genes, as shown in the example
below. The use of reporters is advantageous,
because it circumvents the necessity to derive
different assays for individual genes and also
allows the activities of transgenes and
homologous endogenous genes to be
distinguished in the same cell.
An example of in vitro promoter
analysis using chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase
The first reporter gene to be used in animal
cells was cat, derived from E. coli transposon
Tn9 (Gorman et al. 1982b); it has also been
used to a certain extent in plants (HerreraEstrella et al. 1983a,b). This gene encodes the
enzyme chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT), which confers resistance to the
antibiotic chloramphenicol by transferring
acetyl groups on to the chloramphenicol
molecule from acetyl-CoA. If 14C-labeled
chloramphenicol is used as the substrate,
CAT activity produces a mixture of labeled
monoacetylated and diacetylated forms,

which can be separated by thin-layer
chromatography and detected by
autoradiography. The higher the CAT
activity, the more acetylated forms of
chloramphenicol are produced. These can be
quantified in a scintillation counter or using a
phosphorimager. Gorman et al. (1982a,b)
placed the cat gene downstream of the
SV40 and Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) promoters
in the expression vectors pSV2 and pRSV2, to
create the pSV-CAT and pRSV-CAT constructs,
respectively. These vectors, and derivatives
thereof, have been widely used to analyze
transient-transfection efficiency, because
the promoters are active in many animal cells
and CAT activity can be assayed rapidly in
cell homogenates.
The cat gene has also been used to test
regulatory elements by attaching it to a
“minimal promoter”, typically a simple
TATA box. This basic construct generates
only low-level background transcription in
transiently transfected cells. The activity of
other regulatory elements, such as promoters
and enhancers, and response elements, which
activate transcription in response to external
signals, can be tested by subcloning them
upstream of the minimal promoter and testing
their activity in appropriate cell types. In an
early example of this type of experiment,
Walker et al. (1986) attached the promoter
and 5′-flanking sequences of human and rat
insulin and rat chymotrypsin genes, which are
expressed at a high level only in the pancreas,
to the cat gene. Each gene is expressed in
clearly distinct cell types: insulin is synthesized
in endocrine b cells and chymotrypsin in
exocrine cells. Plasmid DNA was introduced
into either pancreatic endocrine or pancreatic
exocrine cell lines in culture and, after a
subsequent 44 h incubation, cell extracts
were assayed for CAT activity. It was found
that the constructs retained their preferential
expression in the appropriate cell type.
The insulin 5′-flanking DNA conferred a
high level of CAT expression in the endocrine
but not the exocrine cell line, with the
continued

230

CHAPTER 12

Box 12.1
converse being the case for the chymotrypsin
5′-flanking DNA. The analysis was extended
by creating deletions in the 5′-flanking
sequences and testing their effects on
expression. From such experiments it
could be concluded that sequences located
150–300 bp upstream of the transcription
start are essential for appropriate cell-specific
transcription.
Other reporter genes
The cat reporter gene has been widely
used for in vitro assays but has a generally
low sensitivity and is dependent on a rather
cumbersome isotopic assay format. An
alternative reporter gene, SeAP (secreted
alkaline phosphatase), has been useful in many
cases because various sensitive colorimetric,

depends on the host cell’s propensity to break down
extrachromosomal DNA. Linear DNA is degraded
very quickly in mammalian cells, so high-quality
supercoiled plasmid vectors are used. Even covalently
closed circular DNA tends to remain stable for only
one or two days in most animal cells, but this is
sufficient for the various transient expression assays.
Some cell types, however, are renowned for their
ability to maintain exogenous DNA for longer periods.
In the human embryonic kidney cell line 293, for
example, supercoiled plasmid DNA can remain stable
for up to 80 hours (Gorman et al. 1990).
Runaway polyomavirus replicons facilitate the
accumulation of large amounts of protein in a
short time
Transient transformation can also be achieved using
replicon vectors that contain origins of replication
derived from certain viruses of the polyomavirus
family, such as simian virus 40 (SV40) and the murine
polyomavirus. These viruses cause lytic infections,
i.e. the viral genome replicates to a very high copy
number, resulting in cell lysis and the release of
thousands of progeny virions. During the infection
cycle, viral gene products accumulate at high levels,
so there has been considerable interest in exploiting this strategy to produce recombinant proteins.

continued
fluorometric, and chemiluminescent assay
formats are available. Also, since the reporter
protein is secreted, it can be assayed in the
growth medium, so there is no need to kill
the cells (Berger et al. 1988, Cullen & Malim
1992). The bacterial genes lacZ and gusA
have been used as reporters for in vitro
assays using colorimetric and fluorometric
substrates. An important advantage of these
markers is that they can also be used for
in situ assays, since histological assay formats
are available. More recently, bioluminescent
markers, such as luciferase and green
fluorescent protein, have become popular
because these can be assayed in live cells and
whole animals and plants. The lacZ, gusA,
luciferase, and green fluorescent protein
reporter genes are discussed in more detail
in Box 15.1.

SV40 was the first animal virus to be characterized
in detail at the molecular level, and for this reason it
was also the first to be developed as a vector. The productive host range of the virus is limited to certain
simian cells. The development of SV40 replicon
vectors is discussed in some detail below, but first it
is necessary to understand a little of the molecular
biology of the virus itself.
SV40 has a small icosahedral capsid and a circular
double-stranded DNA genome of approximately 5 kb.
The genome has two transcription units, known
as the early and late regions, which face in opposite
directions. Both transcripts produce multiple products by alternative splicing (Fig. 12.5). The early
region produces regulatory proteins, while the late
region produces components of the viral capsid.
Transcription is controlled by a complex regulatory element located between the early and late regions, and this includes early and late promoters, an
enhancer, and the origin of replication. During the
first stage of the SV40 infection cycle, the early transcript produces two proteins, known as the large T
and small t tumor antigens. The function of the Tantigen is particularly important as this protein binds
to the viral origin of replication and is absolutely
required for genome replication. All vectors based on
SV40 must therefore be supplied with functional Tantigen, or they cannot replicate, even in permissive

Gene transfer to animal cells

vp

3
2

3’

A
A

AA

vp

NA

18 S m
RN
A
19S mR
NA

A

tra
ns
c

vp

1

AA

Late

ts

AA

rip

16S mR

AA

3’

A

AA
A

5’
5’
t
T

Origin of
replication

Early transc

s
ript

Fig. 12.5 Transcripts and transcript processing of SV40.
Intron sequences which are spliced out of the transcripts are
shown by purple lines.

cells. The T-antigen also acts as an oncoprotein,
interacting with the host’s cell cycle machinery and
causing uncontrolled cell proliferation.
The first SV40 vectors were viral vectors, and
were used to introduce foreign genes into animal
cells by transduction. The small size of the viral
genome made in vitro manipulation straightforward.
Either the late region (Goff & Berg 1976) or the
early region (Gething & Sambrook 1981) could be
replaced with foreign DNA. However, since both
these regions are essential for the infection cycle,
their functions had to be provided in trans initially
by a co-introduced helper virus. The use of early
replacement vectors was considerably simplified by
the development of the COS cell line, a derivative of
the African green monkey cell line CV-1 containing
an integrated partial copy of the SV40 genome. The
integrated fragment included the entire T-antigen
coding sequence and provided this protein in trans to
any SV40 recombinant in which the early region
had been replaced with foreign DNA (Gluzman 1981).
For example, using this system, Gething & Sambrook
(1981) made recombinant viruses that expressed
influenza virus hemagglutinin in COS cells.
The major problem with these initial SV40 vectors
was that the capacity of the viral capsid allowed a
maximum of only about 2.5 kb of foreign DNA to be
incorporated. The discovery that plasmids carrying
the SV40 origin of replication behaved in the same
manner as the virus itself, i.e. replicating to a high
copy number in permissive monkey cells, was a

231

significant breakthrough. Since these SV40 replicons were not packaged into viral capsids, there
were no size constraints on the foreign DNA. Many
laboratories developed plasmid vectors on this principle (Myers & Tjian 1980, Lusky & Botchan 1981,
Mellon et al. 1981). In general, these vectors consisted of a small SV40 DNA fragment (containing the
origin of replication) cloned in an E. coli plasmid vector. Some vectors also contained a T-antigen coding
region and could be used in any permissive cell line,
while others contained the origin alone and could
only replicate in COS cells. Permanent cell lines are
not established when SV40 replicons are transfected
into COS cells because the massive vector replication
eventually causes cell death. However, even though
only a low proportion of cells are transfected, the
high copy number (105 genomes per cell) is compensatory, allowing the transient expression of cloned
genes and the harvesting of large amounts of recombinant protein. As an example, one of the pcDNA3.1
series of vectors marketed by Invitrogen Inc. is
shown in Fig. 12.6. This version of the vector contains the SV40 origin for high-level expression in
COS cells, a neo selection cassette, ColE1 and f1 origins for manipulation in bacteria, and an expression
cassette driven by the human cytomegalovirus promoter incorporating two epitope tags to facilitate
protein purification and an EK site to remove the
epitope tags after purification. These components
are described in more detail in Box 12.2.
BK and BPV replicons facilitate episomal
replication, but the plasmids tend to be
structurally unstable
As an alternative to integration, stable transformation can be achieved using a recombinant vector
that is maintained as an episomal replicon. While
viruses such as SV40 use a lytic infection strategy,
others such as human BK virus and Epstein–Barr
virus cause latent infections, where the viral genome
is maintained as a low to moderate copy-number
replicon that does not interfere with host-cell growth.
Plasmids that contain such latent origins behave in
a similar manner to the parental virus, except they
are not packaged in a viral capsid. Such vectors
are advantageous because the DNA does not need
to integrate in order to be stably maintained, thus
stable transformation occurs with an efficiency equal
to that normally achieved with transient transformation. Furthermore, while the expression of integrated
transgenes is often affected by the surrounding DNA,

232

CHAPTER 12

Box 12.2 Construct design for high-level transgene expression in animal cells
Many of the expression systems discussed in
this chapter are used in experiments where
the production of recombinant protein is the
ultimate aim. In such cases, it is appropriate
for transgene expression to be maximized.
Although the different expression systems vary
in their total potential yield, in terms of vector
design and experimental methodology, the
following considerations should apply when
high-level expression is required.

use incorporate a heterologous intron, such as
the SV40 small t-antigen intron or the human
growth-hormone intron, or modified hybrid
introns that match the consensus splice donor
and acceptor-site sequences. Note that introns
may not be used in some expression systems,
such as vaccinia virus. The presence of an
intron is very important in constructs that
are to be expressed in transgenic animals
(see Box 13.2 for more discussion).

The use of a strong and constitutive
promoter

The inclusion of a polyadenylation signal

Very active promoters provide the highest
levels of transgene expression. In viral vectors,
transgenes are often expressed under the
control of the strongest endogenous
promoters, e.g. the baculovirus polyhedrin
promoter, the adenoviral E1 promoter and the
vaccinia virus p7.5 promoter. Certain viruses
contain strong promoters and enhancers that
function in a wide range of cell types, and
several of these have been subverted for
use in plasmid vectors. The elements most
commonly used in mammalian cells are
the SV40 early promoter and enhancer
(Mulligan & Berg 1981b), the Rous sarcoma
virus long-terminal-repeat promoter
and enhancer (Gorman et al. 1982a), and
the human cytomegalovirus immediate
early promoter (Boshart et al. 1985).
Although these function widely, they are
not necessarily active in all mammalian
cells, e.g. the SV40 promoter functions
poorly in the human embryonic kidney line
293 (Gorman et al. 1989).
The inclusion of an intron
The presence of an intron in a eukaryotic
expression unit usually enhances expression.
Evidence for the positive effect of introns
accumulated in the early years of cDNA
expression in animal cells, although there
are also many studies in which efficient gene
expression was obtained in the absence of an
intron (see Kaufman 1990a,b). Nevertheless,
most mammalian expression vectors in current

Polyadenylation signals (terminators) are
required in eukaryotic genes to generate a
defined 3′ end to the mRNA. In most cases,
this defined end is extended by the addition
of several hundred adenosine residues to
generate a poly(A) (polyadenylate) tail. This
tail is required for the export of mRNA into
the cytoplasm, and also increases its stability.
In the absence of such a site, the level of
recombinant protein produced in transformed
cells can fall by as much as 90% (Kaufman
1990a,b). Poly(A) sites from the SV40 early
transcription unit or mouse b-globin gene
are often incorporated into mammalian
expression vectors.
The removal of unnecessary untranslated
sequence
Eukaryotic mRNAs comprise a coding region
(which actually encodes the gene product)
bracketed by untranslated regions (UTRs) of
variable length. Both the 5′ and 3′ UTRs can
influence gene expression in a number of ways
(Kozak 1999). For example, the 5′ UTR may
contain one or more AUG codons upstream of
the authentic translational start site, and these
are often detrimental to translational initiation.
The 3′ UTR may contain regulatory elements
that control mRNA stability (e.g. AU-rich
sequences that reduce stability have been
identified (see Shaw & Kamen 1986)).
Furthermore, both the 5′ and 3′ UTRs
may be rich in secondary structure, which
prevents efficient translation. In animal
systems, UTR sequences are generally
continued

233

Gene transfer to animal cells

Box 12.2
removed from transgene constructs to
maximize expression.

The incorporation of a targeting signal

Optimization of the transgene for
translational efficiency

Igκ Leader

P CMV

BGH

myc epitope

pA
f1

or

i

40
Psv

pSecTag2

Zeoc
in

ATG

If the goal of an expression study is to recover
large amounts of a functional eukaryotic protein,
it is necessary to consider whether that protein
needs to be post-translationally modified in
order to function correctly. For example, many
proteins intended for therapeutic use require
authentic glycosylation patterns not only
for correct function, but also to prevent an
immune response in the patient. Since specific
types of modification occur in particular cell
compartments, it is necessary to consider
strategies for targeting the recombinant
protein to the correct compartment to ensure
that it is appropriately modified. Proteins that
need to be glycosylated, for example, must be
targeted to the secretory pathway using a
signal peptide. Many mammalian expression
vectors are available for this purpose, and
they incorporate heterologous signal peptides.
The figure below shows the Invitrogen vector
pSecTag2, which incorporates a sequence
encoding the murine immunoglobulin lightchain signal peptide for high-efficiency
targeting to the secretory pathway. Note
also that the C terminus of the recombinant
protein is expressed as a fusion to two different
epitope tags to facilitate protein purification
(see p. 87).

Sfi I*
AscI
HindIII
Asp718
KpnI
BamHI
BstXI
EcoRI*
PstI*
EcoRV
BstXI
NotI
XhoI
DraII
ApaI

The sequence around the translational
initiation site should conform to Kozak’s
consensus, which is defined as 5′CCRCCAUGG-3′ (Kozak 1986, 1999). Of
greatest importance is the purine at the −3
position (identified as R) and the guanidine
at position +4. The adenosine of the AUG
initiation codon (underlined) is defined as
position +1, and the immediately preceding
base is defined as position −1. The expression
of foreign genes in animals can also be
inefficient in some cases due to suboptimal
codon choice, which reflects the fact that
different organisms prefer to use different
codons to specify the same amino acid. If a
transgene contains a codon that is commonly
used in the source organism but rarely used in
the host, translation may pause at that codon
due to the scarcity of the corresponding
transfer RNA (tRNA). This will reduce the rate
of protein synthesis and may even lead to
truncation of the protein or frame-shifting.
It may therefore be beneficial to “codonoptimize” transgenes for the expression host.

T7

continued

li
cil
pi
Am
n

pA
40
SV
ColE1

6xHis

TAA

234

(His) B

ATG

Xpress™
Epitope

EK Site

BGH pA

V

Asp718I
KpnI
BamHI
BstXI
EcoRI
EcoRV
BstXI
NotI
XhoI
XbaI
ApaI

T7

CHAPTER 12

f1 o

P CM

ri
o
40
SV

ri

S

0p
V4

A

C olE 1

Neomy
ci n

A m p i c i l li n

pcDNA3.1/
His A, B, & C
5.5kb

Fig. 12.6 The transient expression vector pcDNA3.1
HisAB&C, which allows donor DNA fragments to be cloned
in three reading frames and the recombinant protein to be
expressed with integral epitope tags.

pcDNA3.1/V5-His A, B, & C

a problem known as the position effect (see Box 13.2),
these episomal vectors are not subject to such
influences.
The human BK polyomavirus infects many cell
types and is maintained with a copy number of about
500 genomes per cell. Plasmid vectors containing
the BK origin replicate in the same manner as the
virus when the BK T-antigen is provided in trans.

However, by incorporating a selectable marker such
as neo into the vector, it is possible to increase the
concentration of antibiotics in the medium progressively and select for cells with a higher vector copy
number (Fig. 12.7). Cell lines have been propagated
for over a year under such conditions (de Benedetti &
Rhoads 1991) and stable lines with up to 9000 copies
of the genome have been produced. Any transgene

(a)

(c)

Late gene expression

Early gene expression

3 enhancers
c

68bp

50bp

68bp

A/T IR1 IR2

III II

BKVE

Pal

I

AMP
T antigen-binding sites
Minimal ori
Early enhancer region

BKori
BKt

ORI
BKV vector

(b)

BKT

polyA
le

cti

on

polyA
Promoter

200

Zn-finger

C
NLS

N

Se

Transformation, replication, transactivation
ori binding
Helicase activity
ATPase activity, ATP binding
Host range domain
400

600

675

Fig. 12.7 BKV-derived vector. (a) Schematic overview of the BKV ori. The features shared by all polyomavirinae ori regions are
an AT-rich sequence (A/T) at the late side, inverted repeats (IR1 and IR2) and a GC-rich palindrome (Pal) on the early side
of the ori. The BKV minimal ori consists of an inverted repeat, T antigen-binding site II, and the 20-bp A/T block. The early
enhancer region consists of three repeats, of which the middle one has an 18-bp deletion and an element called c. (b) Schematic
representation of the different activities of the BKV large T antigen. The N-terminal region of BKV large T antigen starts from
the initiation codon up to the nuclear localization signal (NLS). The middle part contains regions for binding of T antigen to
BKV DNA and a zinc finger region. This region localizes the helicase and ATPase activity as well as sequences important for
complex formation with the cellular p53 protein. The C-terminal part has been shown to serve a host range function.
(c) Representation of a common BKV-derived expression vector. The BKV sequences important for the typical features of the virus,
as described in the text, are represented by purple edged bars. BKVE, BKV early promoter; BKt, BKV small t antigen; BKT, BKV large
T antigen. Dark purple bars indicate the sequences necessary for selection after transfection in eukaryotic cells. Dark purple bars
represent sequences essential for amplification and selection in bacteria.

235

Gene transfer to animal cells

incorporated into the vector is expressed at very high
levels, leading to the recovery of large amounts of
recombinant protein (Sabbioni et al. 1995). SV40
itself can also be used as a stable episomal vector if
the availability of T-antigen is rationed to prevent
runaway replication. This has been achieved using a
conditional promoter, and by mutating the coding
region to render the protein temperature sensitive
(Gerard & Gluzman 1985, Rio et al. 1985).
The first virus to be developed as an episomal
replicon was bovine papillomavirus (BPV). The
papillomaviruses are distantly related to the polyomaviruses, and cause papillomas (warts) in a range
of mammals. BPV has been exploited as a stable
expression vector because it can infect mouse cells
without yielding progeny virions. Instead, the viral
genome is maintained as an episomal replicon, with
a copy number of about 100. The molecular biology
of BPV is considerably more complex that that of
SV40, but the early part of the infection cycle is
similar, involving the production of a T-antigen that:

(a) is required for viral replication and (b) causes
oncogenic transformation of the host cell. The early
functions of BPV are carried on a 5.5-kb section of
the genome, which is called the 69% transforming
fragment (BPV69T). This was cloned in the E. coli
plasmid pBR322, and was shown to be sufficient
to establish and maintain episomal replication, as
well as induce cell proliferation (Sarver et al. 1981a).
Initially, the ability of the virus to cause uncontrolled
cell proliferation was used to identify transformed
cells, but this limited the range of cell types that could
be used. The incorporation of selectable markers
such as neo allows transformants to be selected for
resistance to G418, permitting the use of a wider
range of cell types (Law et al. 1983). BPV69T replicons have been used to express numerous proteins,
including rat preproinsulin (Sarver et al. 1981b) and
human β-globin (Di Maio et al. 1982). Generally, the
plasmids are maintained episomally, but the copy
number varies from 10 to over 200 vector molecules
per cell (Fig. 12.8). Some investigators have reported

(a)

(c)
MME
Minimal ori
A/T

E2BS

E1BS

E2BS

E7
E6
AMP

E1

BPV-1
ori

E8

(b)
ORI
E2 interaction domain

polyA

BPV-1 vector

DNA-binding domain

C
NLS

N
200

400

605

E4

n

E1

E2

o
cti
Sele

ATP-binding domain

Promoter
polyA

E3
E5

Interaction
DNA-binding and dimerization domain
Transactivation domain
E2

N

Hinge

200

C
410

Fig. 12.8 BPV-1-derived vector. (a) Schematic view of the BPV-1 ori. The minimal ori (60 bp in length) contains an A/T-rich
region, the E1-binding site (BS) including an 18-bp DS element and an E2-binding site of 12 bp. The minichromosome
maintenance element (MME) is composed of multiple binding sites (12) for the transcriptional activator E2. (b) Functional
domains of E1 and E2. E1 has several enzymatic functions such as an ATPase activity, a DNA-binding domain and an E2
interaction domain. E2 consists of a transactivation domain, which interacts with E1, and a DNA-binding domain. Both domains
are linked with a hinge region. (c) Schematic representation of a BPV-1 expression vector (69%). BPV-1 sequences consisting of
the BPV-1 ori and the eight E genes are represented by dark purple bars. Dark purple bars indicate sequences for eukaryotic
selection, whereas purple edged bars indicate bacterial replication and selection sequences.

236

CHAPTER 12

the long-term maintenance of such episomal transformants (Fukunaga et al. 1984) while others found
a tendency for the construct to integrate into the
genome (Ostrowski et al. 1983, Sambrook et al.
1985). Recombination within the vector or between
vectors is also a fairly common observation resulting
in unpredictable spontaneous deletions and plasmid
oligomerization. Recombination events and copy
number appear to be affected by multiple factors,
including the host-cell type, the incorporated transgene, and the structure of the vector itself (see Mecsas
& Sugden 1987).
Replicons based on Epstein–Barr virus
facilitate long-term transgene stability
Unlike BPV replicons, vectors based on Epstein–Barr
virus (EBV) replicate very stably in mammalian cells.
EBV is a herpesvirus (also see discussion of herpes simplex virus later in the chapter), with a large doublestranded DNA genome (approximately 170 kb),
which predominantly infects primate and canine
cells. It is also naturally lymphotrophic, infecting
B-cells in humans and causing infectious mononucleosis. In cultured lymphocytes, the virus becomes
established as an episomal replicon with about 1000
copies per cell (Miller 1985). Although the virus itself
only infects lymphocytes, the genome is maintained
in a wide range of primate cells if introduced by
transfection. Only two relatively small regions of the
genome are required for episomal maintenance – the
latent origin (oriP) and a gene encoding a transacting regulator called Epstein Barr nuclear antigen
1 (EBNA1) (Yates et al. 1984, Reisman et al. 1985).
These sequences have formed the basis of a series of
latent EBV-based plasmid expression vectors, which
are maintained at a copy number of 2–50 copies per
cell (Fig. 12.9). The first EBV vectors comprised the
oriP element cloned in a bacterial plasmid, and could
replicate only if EBNA1 was supplied in trans. Yates
et al. (1984) described the construction of a shuttle
vector, pBamC, comprising oriP, a bacterial origin,
and ampicillin resistance gene derived from pBR322,
and the neomycin phosphotransferase marker for
selection in animal cells. A derivative vector, pHEBO,
contained a hygromycin resistance marker instead
of neo (Sugden et al. 1985). The presence of a
selectable marker in such vectors is important,
because if selection pressure is not applied, EBV replicons are lost passively from the cell population at
about 5% per cell generation. Yates et al. (1985)
added the EBNA-1 gene to pHEBO, producing a con-

struct called p201 that was capable of replicating
independently. Similar constructs have been developed in other laboratories (Lupton & Levine 1985).
EBV replicons have been used to express a wide
range of proteins in mammalian cell lines, including
the epidermal growth factor receptor (Young et al.
1988), the tumor necrosis factor receptor (Heller
et al. 1990), and an Na+K+ ATPase (Canfield et al.
1990). Generally, such studies have resulted in
high-level and long-term gene expression (reviewed
by Margolskee 1992, Sclimenti & Calos 1998). It has
been suggested that the stability of EBV replicons
may reflect the fact that replication is limited to once
per cell cycle, unlike BPV replicons that replicate
continuously throughout S-phase (DuBridge & Calos
1988, Gilbert & Cohen 1987). This, together with
the large genome size, allows EBV-derived vectors to
carry large DNA fragments, including mammalian
cDNAs and genes. EBV replicons have therefore been
used for the construction of episomal cDNA libraries
for expression cloning (Margolskee et al. 1988),
and more recently for the preparation of genomic
libraries (Sun et al. 1994). The oriP element has also
been incorporated into yeast artificial chromosome
vectors carrying large human genomic DNA fragments. These linear vectors were then circularized
in vitro and introduced into human cells expressing
EBNA1, whereupon they were maintained as episomal replicons (Simpson et al. 1996). EBV can also
replicate lytically in primate B-cells, and this requires
a separate origin (oriLyt) and a distinct trans-acting
regulator called ZEBRA. Vectors have been developed containing both origins, and these are maintained at a moderate copy number in cells latently
infected with the virus, but can be amplified up to
400-fold if ZEBRA is supplied by transfecting the cells
with the corresponding viral gene under the control of a constitutive promoter (Hammerschmidt &
Sugden 1988). Interestingly, while the latent vector
remains as a circular replicon, vector DNA isolated
from induced cells is present as multicopy concatemers, reflecting the rolling circle mechanism of lytic
replication.

DNA can be delivered to animal cells using
bacterial vectors
The exploitation of living bacteria for gene transfer is
central to the genetic manipulation of plants. As discussed in Chapter 14, Agrobacterium tumefaciens and
its close relatives have been used for over 20 years to

237

Gene transfer to animal cells

(a)

(c)
FR

DS
AMP
EBNA1
ORI

(b)
DNA-binding and dimerization domain

EBV vector

o
cti
Sele

Transactivation domain

Promoter

DNA linking

n

polyA

OriP

NLS

Chromosome-binding domain

N

gly-ala repeat

200

C
400

600 641

Fig. 12.9 EBV-derived vector. (a) oriP consists of two non-contiguous elements, namely the family of repeats (FR) and the dyad
symmetry (DS) element, containing 20 and four binding sites for EBNA1, respectively. (b) Representation of EBNA1. The central
domain is composed entirely of a repetitive array of glycine and alanine residues. Most of this domain can be deleted without
affecting EBNA1 function. The DNA-linking domains seem to contribute to the activation of transcription and replication. The
chromosome-binding activity of EBNA1 secures the separation to the daughter cells during mitosis. (c) A basic EBV-derived vector
consists of the viral sequences oriP and EBNA1 (light purple bars), an expression cassette for eukaryotic selection after transfection
(dark purple bars), and sequences necessary for replication and selection in bacteria (mid purple bars).

generate transgenic plants and transformed plant
cells, and this remains one of the most popular genetransfer strategies. More recently, it has been shown
that A. tumefaciens can transfer DNA to cultured
human cells (Kunik et al. 2001). As discussed below,
however, this example of bactofection is not an isolated observation. Indeed there is growing evidence
that highly efficient gene transfer to animals can be
achieved using a variety of bacterial species.
The protoplast fusion technique discussed above
can be regarded as a highly artificial form of bactofection, but the amount of human intervention required
distinguishes the technique from those discussed
below, which use living bacteria. Agrobacterium species can transfer DNA to plants without any human
intervention. The first reports of similarly natural
gene transfer between bacterial and animal cells were
published in the mid-1990s (e.g. Sizemore et al. 1995,
reviewed by Higgins & Portnoy 1998). Typically, the
bacteria invade the host animal cells and undergo
lysis within them, releasing plasmid DNA. In the case
of Salmonella species, lysis occurs in the phagocytic
vesicle, while for other species (e.g. Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella flexneri) lysis occurs after the bacterium has escaped from the vesicle. The plasmid DNA
then finds its way to the nucleus, where it is incorporated into the host cell’s genome and expressed. In
contrast, A. tumefaciens has been shown to transfer
DNA to mammalian (and plant) cells without

invading them. In this case, transfer occurs by attachment to the outside of the cell followed by conjugation (the transfer of DNA through a conduit called a
pilus, which is assembled by the bacterial cell).
An important principle in the use of live bacteria
as invasive gene-transfer vehicles is that they must be
attenuated. This is because the gene-transfer system
exploits the natural ability of the bacteria to infect
and subvert the activity of eukaryotic cells. Without
attenuation, the bacteria would multiply and destroy
the host cells. Attenuation is achieved in several
ways. The first is to use auxotrophic mutants, i.e.
bacterial strains that are unable to manufacture
essential molecules such as amino acids, nucleotides,
or components of the cell wall. For example, aroA
mutants are unable to synthesize aromatic amino
acids, and Salmonella typhimurium and Shigella flexneri
strains carrying this mutation have been used for
gene transfer (reviewed by Weiss & Chakraborty
2001). Alternatively, the bacteria can be engineered
so that they undergo inducible autolysis. There are
no auxotrophic strains of Listeria monocytogenes, so
attenuation has been achieved by induced suicide,
i.e. introducing an autolysin-encoding gene that
is activated once the bacterium is inside the host
cell (Dietrich et al. 1998). In vitro, lysis can also be
induced by treating cells with antibiotics.
Thus far, bacteria-mediated gene transfer has
been used not only as a general transfection method

238

CHAPTER 12

for the introduction of DNA into cultured cells, but
also as a high-efficiency method for gene transfer in
vivo. There have been many reports of bacterial gene
transfer as a method for the delivery of recombinant
DNA vaccines (e.g. see Xiang et al. 2000, Woo et al.
2001) and comparative studies indicate that bacterial transfer is more efficient than equivalent naked
DNA vaccines, which are discussed in Chapter 26
(Zoller & Christ 2001). The potential of bacterial
gene transfer in gene therapy has also been explored
(Paglia et al. 2000).

Viruses are also used as gene-transfer
vectors
Virus particles have a natural ability to adsorb to the
surface of cells and gain entry, and this can be exploited to deliver recombinant DNA into animal cells.
Due to the efficiency with which viruses can deliver
their nucleic acid into cells, and the high levels of
replication and gene expression it is possible to achieve,
viruses have been used as vectors not only for gene
expression in cultured cells, but also for gene transfer
to living animals. Several classes of viral vector have
been developed for use in human gene therapy, and
at least eight have been used in clinical trials. Still
others have been developed as recombinant vaccines.
Before introducing the individual vector systems,
we discuss some general properties of viral transduction vectors. Transgenes may be incorporated
into viral vectors either by addition to the whole
genome, or by replacing one or more viral genes.
This is generally achieved either by ligation (many
viruses have been modified to incorporate unique
restriction sites) or homologous recombination. If
the transgene is added to the genome, or if it replaces
one or more genes that are non-essential for the
infection cycle in the expression host being used, the
vector is described as helper-independent because it
can propagate independently. However, if the transgene replaces an essential viral gene, this renders
the vector helper-dependent so that missing functions
must be supplied in trans. This can be accomplished
by co-introducing a helper virus, or transfecting
the cells with a helper plasmid, each of which must
carry the missing genes. Usually steps are taken
to prevent the helper virus completing its own
infection cycle, so that only the recombinant vector
is packaged. It is also desirable to try and prevent
recombination occurring between the helper and
the vector, as this can generate wild-type replication-

competent viruses as contaminants. An alternative
to the co-introduction of helpers is to use a complementary cell line, sometimes termed a “packaging
line”, which is transformed with the appropriate
missing genes. For many applications, it is favorable
to use vectors from which all viral coding sequences
have been deleted. These amplicons (also described
as fully deleted, gutted, or gutless vectors) contain
just the cis-acting elements required for packaging
and genome replication. The advantage of such
vectors is their high capacity for foreign DNA and the
fact that, since no viral gene products are made, the
vector has no intrinsic cytotoxic effects. The choice
of vector depends on the particular properties of
the virus and the intended host, whether transient
or stable expression is required, and how much
DNA needs to be packaged. For example, icosahedral
viruses such as adenoviruses and retroviruses package their genomes into preformed capsids, whose
volume defines the maximum amount of foreign DNA
that can be accommodated. Conversely, rod-shaped
viruses such as the baculoviruses form the capsid
around the genome, so there are no such size constraints. There is no ideal virus for gene transfer –
each has its own advantages and disadvantages – and
many researchers are investigating the potential
of hybrid vectors which combine useful properties
from two or more viruses (Lam & Breakfield 2000).
Adenovirus vectors are useful for short-term
transgene expression
Adenoviruses are DNA viruses with a linear, doublestranded genome of approximately 36 kb. The genome
of serotype Ad5, from which many adenovirus
vectors are derived, is shown in Fig. 12.10. There
are six early transcription units, most of which
are essential for viral replication, and a major late
transcript that encodes components of the capsid.
Adenoviruses have been widely used as gene-transfer
and expression vectors because they have many
advantageous features, including stability, a high
capacity for foreign DNA, a wide host range that
includes non-dividing cells, and the ability to produce high-titer stocks (up to 1011 pfu/ml) (reviewed
by Imperiale & Kochanek 2004). They are suitable
for transient expression in dividing cells because
they do not integrate efficiently into the genome, but
prolonged expression can be achieved in post-mitotic
cells such as neurons (e.g. see LaSalle et al. 1993,
Davidson et al. 1993). Adenoviruses are particularly
attractive as gene-therapy vectors because the virions

239

Gene transfer to animal cells

TL
L2

L1
E1a
3’
5’
0

Ψ

MLT
E1b

VA

L3

L4

plX

L5

E3
5’
3’

10

20

30

40

50

IVa2

60

70

80
E2a
E2b

90

100
E4

Fig. 12.10 Map of the adenovirus genome, showing the positions of the early transcription units (E), the major late transcript
(MLT), the tripartite leader (TL), and other genes (VA, pIX, IVa2). Terminal repeats are shown in purple, ψ is the packaging site.

are taken up efficiently by cells in vivo and adenovirus-derived vaccines have been used in humans
with no reported side effects. However, the death of a
patient following an extreme inflammatory response
to adenoviral gene therapy treatment underlines
the necessity for rigorous safety testing (Marshall
1999). A number of strategies are being developed to
control the activity of the immune system when the
vectors are first introduced into the host (reviewed
by Benihoud et al. 1999, Liu & Muruve 2003).
Most early adenoviral vectors were replication
deficient, lacking the essential E1a and E1b genes,
and often the non-essential gene E3. These first
generation “E1 replacement vectors” had a maximum capacity of about 7 kb and were propagated
in the human embryonic kidney line 293. This is
transformed with the leftmost 11% of the adenoviral
genome, comprising the E1 transcription unit, and
hence supplies these functions in trans (Graham
et al. 1977). Although these vectors have been used
with great success, they suffer from two particular
problems: cytotoxic effects, resulting from low-level
expression of the viral gene products, and the tendency for recombination to occur between the vector
and the integrated portion of the genome resulting in
the recovery of replication-competent viruses. Higher
capacity vectors have been developed, which lack
the E2 or E4 regions in addition to E1 and E3, providing a maximum cloning capacity of about 10 kb.
These must be propagated on complementary cell
lines providing multiple functions, and such cell
lines have been developed in several laboratories
(e.g. Brough et al. 1996, Gao et al. 1996, Gorziglia
et al. 1996, Zhou et al. 1996). The use of E1/E4
deletions is particularly attractive as the E4 gene is
responsible for many of the immunological effects
of the virus (Gao et al. 1996, Dedieu et al. 1997).
Unwanted recombination has been addressed through
the use of a refined complementary cell line transformed with a specific DNA fragment corresponding

exactly to the E1 genes (Imler et al. 1996). An alternative strategy is to insert a large fragment of “stuffer
DNA” into the non-essential E3 gene, so that recombination yields a genome too large to be packaged
(Bett et al. 1993). Gutless adenoviral vectors are
favored for in vivo gene transfer because they have a
large capacity (up to 37 kb) and minimal cytotoxic
effects (reviewed by Morsey & Caskey 1999). Therefore, transgene expression persists for longer than
can be achieved using first-generation vectors (e.g.
see Scheidner et al. 1998). Complementary cell lines
supplying all adenoviral functions are not available
at present, so gutless vectors must be packaged in
the presence of a helper virus, which presents a risk
of contamination.
Adeno-associated virus vectors integrate into
the host-cell genome
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is not related to adenovirus, but is so-called because it was first discovered
as a contaminant in an adenoviral isolate (Atchison
et al. 1965). AAV is a single-stranded DNA virus, a
member of the parvovirus family, and is naturally
replication defective such that it requires the presence
of another virus (usually adenovirus or herpesvirus)
to complete its infection cycle. In adenovirus- or
herpesvirus-infected cells, AAV replicates lytically
and produces thousands of progeny virions (Buller
et al. 1981). However, in the absence of these helpers,
the AAV DNA integrates into the host cell’s genome,
where it remains as a latent provirus (Berns et al.
1975). In human cells, the provirus integrates predominantly into the same genetic locus on chromosome 19 (Kotin et al. 1990). Subsequent infection by
adenovirus or herpesvirus can “rescue” the provirus
and induce lytic infection.
The dependence of AAV on a heterologous helper
virus provides an unusual degree of control over
vector replication, making AAV theoretically one

240

CHAPTER 12

p5

p19

LTR

p40
LTR

Rep proteins
Rep 78
Rep 68
Rep 52
Rep 40
Cap proteins
VP 1
VP 2/3

Fig. 12.11
genome.

Organization of the adeno-associated virus

of the safest vectors to use for gene therapy. Proviral
integration is considered advantageous for increasing the persistence of transgene expression, while
at the same time the site specificity of this process
theoretically limits the chances of insertional mutagenesis. Other advantages include the wide host range,
which encompasses non-dividing cells (reviewed by
Muzyczka 1992, Rabinowitz & Samulski 1998).
The AAV genome is small (about 5 kb) and comprises a central region containing rep (replicase) and
cap (capsid) genes flanked by 145-b inverted terminal
repeats (Fig. 12.11). In the first AAV vectors, foreign
DNA replaced the cap region and was expressed
from an endogenous AAV promoter (Hermonat &
Muzyczka 1984). Heterologous promoters were also
used, although in many cases transgene expression
was inefficient because the Rep protein inhibited
their activity (reviewed by Muzyczka 1992). Rep
interference with endogenous promoters is also
responsible for many of the cytotoxic effects of the
virus. Several groups therefore developed vectors in
which both genes were deleted and the transgene was
expressed from either an endogenous or heterologous
promoter (McLaughlin et al. 1988, Samulski et al.
1989). From such experiments, it was demonstrated
that the repeats are the only elements required for
replication, transcription, proviral integration, and
rescue. All current AAV vectors are based on this
principle (Lehtonen & Tenenbaum 2003). In vitro
manipulation of AAV is facilitated by cloning the
inverted terminal repeats in a plasmid vector and
inserting the transgene between them. Traditionally,
recombinant viral stocks are produced by transfecting
this construct into cells along with a helper plasmid

to supply AAV products, and then infecting the cells
with adenovirus to stimulate lytic replication and
packaging. This has generally yielded recombinant
AAV titers too low to use for human gene therapy,
and contaminated with helper AAV and adenovirus.
The recent development of transfection-based adenoviral helper plasmids, packaging lines, and the use
of affinity chromatography to isolate AAV virions
has helped to alleviate such problems (reviewed by
Monahan & Samulski 2000, Snyder & Flotte 2002,
Flotte 2004).
AAV vectors have been used to introduce genes
efficiently into many cell types, including liver (Snyder
et al. 1997), muscle (Pruchnic et al. 2000), and
neurons (Davidson et al. 2000). However, deletion
of the rep region abolishes the site specificity of proviral integration, so the vector integrates at essentially random positions which may increase the risk
of insertional gene inactivation (Weitzman et al.
1994, Yang et al. 1997, Young et al. 2000). It is also
unclear whether the persistence of the vector and
prolonged transgene expression is primarily due to
vector integration or episomal maintenance of concatemeric dsDNA copies of the genome (see Monahan
& Samulski 2000 for discussion). The fact that AAV
uses concatemeric replication intermediates has been
used to circumvent perhaps the most serious disadvantage of AAV vectors, which is the limited capacity for foreign DNA. This strategy involves cloning a
large cDNA as two segments in two separate vectors,
which are co-introduced into the same cell. The 5′
portion of the cDNA is cloned in one vector, downstream of a promoter and upstream of a splice
donor site. The 3′ portion is cloned in another vector,
downstream of a splice acceptor. Concatemerization
results in the formation of heterodimers and transcription across the junction yields a mRNA that can
be processed to splice out the terminal repeats of the
vector. In this way, cDNAs of up to 10 kb can be
expressed (Sun et al. 2000, Nakai et al. 2000).
Baculovirus vectors promote high-level
transgene expression in insect cells, but
can also infect mammalian cells
Baculoviruses have rod-shaped capsids and large,
double-stranded DNA genomes. They productively
infect arthropods, particularly insects. One group of
baculoviruses, known as the nuclear polyhedrosis
viruses, has an unusual infection cycle that involves
the production of nuclear occlusion bodies. These are
proteinaceous particles in which the virions are

Gene transfer to animal cells

embedded, allowing the virus to survive harsh environmental conditions such as desiccation (reviewed
by Fraser 1992). Baculovirus vectors are used mainly
for high-level transient protein expression in insects
and insect cells (O’Reilley et al. 1992, King & Possee
1992). The occlusion bodies are relevant to vector
development because they consist predominantly of
a single protein called polyhedrin, which is expressed
at very high levels. The nuclear occlusion stage of
the infection cycle is non-essential for the productive
infection of cell lines, thus the polyhedrin gene can
be replaced with foreign DNA, which can be expressed
at high levels under the control of the endogenous
polyhedrin promoter. Two baculoviruses have been
extensively developed as vectors, namely the Autographa californica multiple nuclear polyhedrosis virus
(AcMNPV) and the Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis virus (BmNPV). The former is used for protein
expression in insect cell lines, particularly those
derived from Spodoptera frugiperda (e.g. Sf9, Sf21).
The latter infects the silkworm, and has been used
for the production of recombinant protein in live
silkworm larvae. One limitation of this expression
system is that the glycosylation pathway in insects
differs from that in mammals, so recombinant mammalian proteins may be incorrectly glycosylated and
hence immunogenic (reviewed by Fraser 1992).
This has been addressed by using insect cell lines
chosen specifically for their ability to carry out
mammalian-type post-translational modifications,
e.g. those derived from Estigmene acrea (Ogonah et al.
1996). An innovative approach to this problem is to
exploit the indefinite capacity of baculovirus vectors
to co-express multiple transgenes, and thus modify
the glycosylation process in the host cell line by
expressing appropriate glycosylation enzymes along
with the transgene of interest. Wagner et al. (1996)
used this strategy to co-express fowl plague hemagglutinin and β-1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase,
resulting in the synthesis of large amounts of
hemagglutinin correctly modified with N-acetylglucosamine residues. Hollister et al. (1998) have
developed an Sf9 cell line that expresses 1,4-galactosyltransferase under the control of a baculovirus
immediate early promoter, such that gene expression is induced by baculovirus infection. These cells
were infected with a recombinant baculovirus vector
carrying a tissue plasminogen activator transgene,
resulting in the production of recombinant protein
that was correctly galactosylated.
Polyhedrin gene replacement vectors are the most
popular due to the high level of recombinant protein

241

that can be expressed (up to 1 mg per 106 cells). The
polyhedrin upstream promoter and 5′ untranslated
region are important for high-level foreign gene
expression and these are included in all polyhedrin
replacement vectors (Miller et al. 1983, Maeda et al.
1985). The highest levels of recombinant protein
expression were initially achieved if the transgene
was expressed as a fusion, incorporating at least
the first 30 amino acids of the polyhedrin protein
(Lucklow & Summers 1988). However, this was
shown to be due not to the stabilizing effects of the
leader sequence on the recombinant protein, but to
the presence of regulatory elements that overlapped
the translational start site. Mutation of the polyhedrin start codon has allowed these sequences to be
incorporated as part of the 5′ untranslated region of
the foreign gene cassette, so that native proteins can
be expressed (Landford 1988). Replacement of the
polyhedrin gene also provides a convenient method
to detect recombinant viruses. The occlusion bodies
produced by wild-type viruses cause the microscopic
viral plaques to appear opalescent if viewed under an
oblique light source (OB+), while recombinant plaques
appear clear (OB–) (Smith et al. 1983). Insertion of
the E. coli lacZ gene in frame into the polyhedrin
coding region allows blue-white screening of recombinants in addition to the OB assay (Pennock et al.
1984), and many current baculovirus expression
systems employ lacZ as a screenable marker to
identify recombinants. Substitution of lacZ with the
gene for green fluorescent protein allows the rapid
identification of recombinants by exposing the plaques to UV light (Wilson et al. 1997).
The construction of baculovirus expression vectors
involves inserting the transgene downstream of the
polyhedrin promoter. Since the genome is large, this
is usually achieved by homologous recombination
using a plasmid vector carrying a baculovirus homology region. A problem with homology-based strategies for introducing foreign DNA into large viral
genomes is that recombinants are generated at a
low efficiency. For baculovirus, recombinant vectors
are recovered at a frequency of 0.5–5% of total
virus produced. The proportion of recombinants has
been increased by using linear derivatives of the
wild-type baculovirus genome containing large deletions, which can be repaired only by homologous
recombination with the targeting vector. Compatible targeting vectors span the deletion and provide
enough flanking homologous DNA to sponsor recombination between the two elements and generate a viable, recombinant genome. Such approaches

242

CHAPTER 12

130 kb

Wild type AcMNPV DNA
(replication competent)
polyhedrin gene shown
as white box

Replication-defective
AcMNV with deleted
polyhedrin gene

Foreign gene

Polyhed
ri n

Transfer vector – insert foreign
gene in polyhedrin sequence.
Transfect with derivative AcMNPV DNA

transfer vector

Homologous recombination
takes place between defective
AcMNPV genome and
transfer vector

result in the production of up to 90% recombinant plaques (Kitts & Possee 1993) (Fig. 12.12)).
Recently, alternative systems have been described
in which the baculovirus genome is maintained as
a low-copy-number replicon in bacteria or yeast,
allowing the powerful genetics of these microbial
systems to be exploited. In the bacterial system, marketed by Gibco-BRL under the name “Bac-to-Bac”,
the baculovirus genome is engineered to contain an

Recombinant AcMNPV DNA
(replication competent)

Fig. 12.12 Procedure
for the generation of
recombinant
baculovirus vectors.

origin of replication from the E. coli F plasmid. This
hybrid replicon, called a bacmid, also contains the
target site for the transposon Tn7, inserted in-frame
within the lacZ gene, which is itself downstream of
the polyhedrin promoter. The foreign gene is cloned
in another plasmid between two Tn7 repeats, and
introduced into the bacmid-containing bacterium,
which also contains a third plasmid expressing Tn7
transposase. Induction of transposase synthesis

Gene transfer to animal cells

results in the site-specific transposition of the transgene into the bacmid, generating a recombinant
baculovirus genome that can be isolated for transfection into insect cells. Transposition of the transgene
into the bacmid interrupts the lacZ gene allowing
recombinant bacterial colonies to be identified by
blue-white screening.
Although baculoviruses productively infect insect
cells, they can also be taken up by mammalian cells
although without producing progeny virions. The
number of mammalian cell lines reported to be transduced by baculoviruses is growing (reviewed by Kost
& Condreay 2002) and this suggests that recombinant baculoviruses could be developed as vectors
for gene therapy. A number of baculovirus-borne
transgenes have been expressed using constitutive
promoters, such as the cytomegalovirus immediate
early promoter (Hoffman et al. 1995) and the Rous
sarcoma virus promoter (Boyce & Bucher 1996).
More recently, cell lines have been generated that
are stably transformed with baculovirus vectors,
although it is not clear whether the viral genome has
integrated in these cells (Condreay et al. 1999).
Baculoviruses are useful not only for the delivery
of foreign genes into mammalian cells, but also for
the delivery of other viruses. For example, hepatitis
C virus does not infect cultured cells, but a hybrid
baculovirus containing the entire HCV genome can
initiate an HCV infection. Baculoviruses can also be
used to improve the production of recombinant viral
vectors. As discussed above, vectors based on adenoviruses are generally replication-defective because
they lack one or more essential viral gene products,
and the highest-capacity amplicons or fully deleted
adenoviruses (FD-AdV), contain no viral genes at all,
only those cis-acting elements required for replication and packaging. Cell lines are not available for
the packaging of such vectors so helper viruses are
normally required, which leads to contamination of
recombinant stocks. Recently, however, a recombinant baculovirus vector has been developed which
carries a packaging-deficient copy of the entire adenovirus genome.
Herpesvirus vectors are latent in many cell
types and may promote long-term transgene
expression
The herpesviruses are large double-stranded DNA
viruses that include Epstein–Barr virus (EBV, discussed
above) and the herpes simplex viruses (e.g. HSV-I,
varicella zoster). Most herpes simplex viruses are

243

transmitted without symptoms (varicella zoster virus
is exceptional), and cause prolonged infections.
Unlike EBV, which is used as a replicon vector, HSV-I
has been developed as a transduction vector (Burton
et al. 2002, Calderwood et al. 2004). Viral replication
can occur in many cell types in a wide range of
species if the genome is introduced by transfection,
but HSV vectors are particularly suitable for gene
therapy in the nervous system because the virus is
remarkably neurotropic. As with other large viruses,
recombinants can be generated in transfected cells
by homologous recombination, and such vectors
may be replication-competent or helper-dependent
(Marconi et al. 1996). Alternatively, plasmid-based
amplicon vectors can be constructed, which carry
only those cis-acting elements required for replication and packaging. These require packaging systems to provide the missing functions in trans (e.g.
Stavropoulos & Strathdee 1998). Therapeutic use of
herpesvirus vectors has been limited, but a number
of genes have been successfully transferred to neurons in vivo (e.g. Boviatsis et al. 1994, Lawrence et al.
1995). Generally, transgene expression is transient,
although prolonged expression has been observed in
some neuronal populations (see reviews by Vos et al.
1996, Simonato et al. 2000). Note that HSV is also
transmitted across neuronal synapses during lytic
infections, a phenomenon that can be exploited to
trace axon pathways (Norgren & Lehman 1998).
Retrovirus vectors integrate efficiently into
the host-cell genome
Retroviruses are RNA viruses that replicate via a
double-stranded DNA intermediate. The infection
cycle involves the precise integration of this intermediate into the genome of the host cell, where it
is transcribed to yield daughter genomes that are
packaged into virions.
Retroviruses have been developed as vectors for
a number of reasons (reviewed by Miller 1992a,b,
Blesch 2004). First, certain retroviruses are acutely
oncogenic because they carry particular genes that
promote host-cell division. Investigation of such
viruses has shown that these viral oncogenes are
in fact gain-of-function derivatives of host genes,
proto-oncogenes, which are normally involved in the
regulation of cell growth. In most cases, the viral
oncogenes are found to be expressed as fusions with
essential viral genes, rendering the virus replication
defective. These acute transforming retroviruses therefore demonstrate the natural ability of retroviruses

244

CHAPTER 12

to act as replication-defective gene transfer vectors.
Secondly, most retroviruses do not kill the host, but
produce progeny virions over an indefinite period.
Retroviral vectors can therefore be used to make
stably transformed cell lines. Thirdly, viral gene
expression is driven by strong promoters, which can
be subverted to control the expression of transgenes.
In the case of murine mammary tumor virus, transcription from the viral promoter is inducible by glucocorticoids, allowing transgenes controlled by this
promoter to be switched on and off (Lee et al. 1981,
Scheidereit et al. 1983). Fourthly, some retroviruses,
such as amphotropic strains of murine leukemia
virus (MLV), have a broad host range allowing the
transduction of many cell types. Finally, retroviruses
make efficient and convenient vectors for gene transfer because the genome is small enough for DNA
copies to be manipulated in vitro in plasmid-cloning
vectors, the vectors can be propagated to high titers
(up to 108 plaque-forming units per ml), and the
efficiency of infection in vitro can approach 100%.
The major disadvantage of oncoretroviral vectors
is that they only productively infect dividing cells,
which limits their use for gene-therapy applications
(Miller et al. 1990, Roe et al. 1993). However, lentiviruses such as HIV are more complex retroviruses
that have the ability to infect non-dividing cells
(Lewis & Emmerman 1994). These were initially
developed as vectors for the stable transduction of
cells displaying CD4 (Shimada et al. 1991, Poznansky
et al. 1991, Buchschacher & Panganiban 1992,
Parolin et al. 1994) but recent advances in lentiviral
vector design provide improved safety and allow the
transduction of multiple cell types (Federico 1999,
Sandrin et al. 2003, Blesch 2004).
Before discussing the development of retroviral
vectors, it is necessary to describe briefly the genome
structure, and the molecular biology of the infection
cycle (for a comprehensive account, see Weiss et al.
1985). A typical retroviral genome map is shown in
Fig. 12.13. The infection cycle begins when the viral

envelope interacts with the host-cell’s plasma membrane, delivering the particle into the cell. The capsid
contains two copies of the RNA genome, as well as
reverse transcriptase/integrase. Thus, immediately
after infection, the RNA genome is reverse transcribed
to produce a cDNA copy. This is a complex process
involving two template jumps, with the result that
the terminal regions of the RNA genome are duplicated in the DNA as long terminal repeats (LTRs).
The DNA intermediate then integrates into the
genome at an essentially random site (there may be
some preference for actively transcribed regions).
The integrated provirus has three genes (gag, pol,
and env). The gag gene encodes a viral structural
protein, pol encodes the reverse transcriptase and
integrase, and the env gene encodes viral envelope
proteins. Viral genomic RNA is synthesized by transcription from a single promoter located in the left
LTR and ends at a polyadenylation site in the right
LTR. Thus, the full-length genomic RNA is shorter
than the integrated DNA copy and lacks the duplicated LTR structure. The genomic RNA is capped
and polyadenylated, allowing the gag gene to be
translated (the pol gene is also translated by readthrough, producing a Gag-Pol fusion protein that is
later processed into several distinct polypeptides).
Some of the full-length RNA also undergoes splicing,
eliminating the gag and pol genes and allowing the
downstream env gene to be translated. Two copies
of the full-length RNA genome are incorporated
into each capsid, which requires a specific cis-acting
packaging site termed ψ. The reverse transcriptase/
integrase is also packaged.
Retroviral vectors are often replicationdefective and self-inactivating
Most retroviral vectors are replication-defective,
because removal of the viral genes provides the
maximum capacity for foreign DNA (about 8 kb).
Only the cis-acting sites required for replication and

ψ

LTR
U3 R U5

LTR
gag

pol

env

PB(-)
ψ
R U5

U3 R U5
PB(+)

gag

pol

env

U3 R polyA

Fig. 12.13 Generic map of an oncoretrovirus genome. Upper figure shows the structure of an integrated provirus, with long
terminal repeats (LTRs) comprising three regions U3, R, and U5, enclosing the three open reading frames gag, pol, and env. Lower
figure shows the structure of a packaged RNA genome, which lacks the LTR structure and possesses a poly(A) tail. PB represents
primer binding sites in the viral replication cycle, and ψ is the packaging signal. The small circles represent splice sites.

Gene transfer to animal cells

packaging are left behind. These include the LTRs
(necessary for transcription and polyadenylation of
the RNA genome as well as integration), the packaging site ψ which is upstream of the gag gene, and
“primer-binding sites” which are used during the
complex replication process. The inclusion of a small
portion of the gag-coding region improves packaging efficiency by up to 10-fold (Bender et al. 1987).
Deleted vectors can be propagated only in the presence of a replication-competent helper virus or a
packaging cell line. The former strategy leads to the
contamination of the recombinant vector stock with
non-defective helper virus. Conversely, packaging
lines can be developed where an integrated provirus
provides the helper functions but lacks the cis-acting
sequences required for packaging (Mann et al. 1983).
Many different retroviruses have been used to
develop packaging lines, and since these determine
the type of envelope protein inserted into the virion
envelope, they govern the host range of the vector
(they are said to pseudotype the vector). Packaging
lines based on amphotropic murine leukemia viruses
allow retroviral gene transfer to a wide range of
species and cell types, including human cells (e.g. see
Cone & Mulligan 1984, Danos & Mulligan 1988). It
is still possible for recombination to occur between
the vector and the integrated helper provirus, resulting in the production of wild-type contaminants. The
most advanced “third-generation” packaging lines
limit the extent of homologous sequence between the
helper virus and the vector and split up the coding
regions so that up to three independent crossover
events are required to form a replication-competent
virus (e.g. see Markowitz et al. 1988).
The simplest strategy for the high-level constitutive expression of single genes in retroviral
vectors is to delete all coding sequences and place
the foreign gene between the LTR promoter and the
viral polyadenylation site. Alternatively, an internal
heterologous promoter can be used to drive transgene expression. However, many investigators have
reported interference between the heterologous promoter and the LTR promoter (e.g. see Emmerman
& Temin 1984, Wu et al. 1996). Yu et al. (1986)
addressed this problem by devising self-inactivating
vectors, containing deletions in the 3′ LTR which are
copied to the 5′ LTR during vector replication, thus
inactivating the LTR promoter while leaving internal promoters intact. This strategy also helps to alleviate additional problems associated with the LTR
promoter: (i) that adjacent endogenous genes may
be activated following integration; and (ii) that the

245

entire expression cassette may be inactivated by DNA
methylation after a variable period of expression in
the target cell (Naviaux & Verma 1992).
Since retroviral vectors are used for the production of stably transformed cell lines, it is necessary
to co-introduce a selectable marker gene along with
the transgene of interest. The expression of two
genes can be achieved by arranging the transgene
and marker gene in tandem, each under the control
of a separate promoter, one of which may be the LTR
promoter. This leads to the production of full-length
and subgenomic RNAs from the integrated provirus.
Alternatively, if the first gene is flanked by splice
sites, only a single promoter is necessary because
the RNA is spliced in a manner reminiscent of the
typical retroviral life cycle, allowing translation of
the downstream gene (Cepko et al. 1984). Vectors
in which the downstream gene is controlled by an
internal ribosome entry site have also been used
(e.g. Dirks et al. 1993, Sugimoto et al. 1994). Since
the viral replication cycle involves transcription
and splicing, an important consideration for vector
design is that the foreign DNA must not contain
sequences that interfere with these processes. For
example, polyadenylation sites downstream of the
transgene should be avoided, as these will cause
truncation of the RNA, blocking the replication cycle
(Miller et al. 1983). Retroviruses also remove any
introns contained within the transgene during replication (Shimotohno & Temin 1982).
There are special considerations for the
construction of lentiviral vectors
Lentiviral vectors are produced in much the same
way as MLV and other retroviral vectors, i.e. by
replacing essential viral genes with the transgene
of interest and using a packaging line to supply the
missing viral functions. Most interest has been
shown in vectors based on HIV, but systems have
also been described that are based on bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV), equine infectious anemia virus
(EIAV), feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), and
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). Special considerations for such vectors include the requirement
for Tat and Rev functions, and the fact that HIV is
one of the few retroviruses known to cause an infectious disease in humans. Therefore, there must be
especially stringent precautions to prevent contamination with replication-competent virus when HIV is
used as a vector, and this has prompted the development of a series of multicomponent packaging lines

246

RSV R U5

ψ gag

RRE

cPPT CAG promoter

Intron

cGFP

WPRE

∆U3

CHAPTER 12

R U5

pol
CMV

gag

CMV

VSV-G

RSV

rev

RRE polyA

polyA

polyA

Fig. 12.14 Prototypical plasmids for the production of third-generation HIV-1 lentiviral vectors. In the top panel, the U3 region
in the 5′LTR is replaced by an RSV promoter and a deletion has been introduced in the U3 region of the 3′LTR (DU3). The ψ region
and a small part of the gag-coding sequence necessary for packaging, the Rev response element (RRE), and the central polypurine
tract (cPPT) are the only regions left from HIV-1. The transgene, in this case GFP, is driven by a CMV/β-actin promoter (CAG).
For mRNA stabilization, a Woodchuck post-transcriptional response element is included (WPRE). The lower three panels show
helper plasmids for the production of lentiviral vectors. The first plasmid contains only the coding regions for the HIV gag and pol
genes and the RRE necessary for efficient splicing. The coding region for the accessory genes, regulatory genes, and envelope, the
packaging signal (ψ), and the LTRs are removed. The second plasmid codes for the VSV-G envelope. The rev gene is expressed on
the third plasmid.

in which different viral functions are supplied on different plasmids introduced by transient transfection
(Federico 1999, Sandrin et al. 2003, Blesch 2004).
The first generation of lentiviral packaging lines
involved transfection of 293T cells with three plasmids, one containing a wild-type HIV genome with
the gag, pol, and env regions replaced by a transgene;
one providing the HIV gag and pol functions under
the control of a constitutive promoter; and one
encoding the G-protein from vesicular stomatitis
virus (VSV) to replace the HIV env function. The
combination of these three plasmids resulted in the
production of VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral vectors
at a high titer, but some pseudotyped replicationcompetent HIV were produced by recombination
during viral replication and packaging. In the second
generation of vectors, the vpr, vpu, nef, and vif genes
were removed from the first plasmid, since these
genes are important for virulence in vivo but are not
required for productive infection in cell lines. More
recently, a third generation of vectors has been
produced in which the U3 region of the 5′ UTR has
been replaced by the human cytomegalovirus early
promoter, therefore making the activity of the LTR
independent from the Tat gene, which consequently

has been deleted. The U3 region of the 3′ UTR has
been modified to include a deletion, making the vector self-inactivating, and several internal modifications have been made including the incorporation
of sequences that enhance transgene expression
(Fig. 12.14). The Rev gene, which is required for gag
and pol expression, has also been removed from the
packaging construct and is instead supplied from a
fourth plasmid to further reduce the likelihood of
replication-competent vectors arising by recombination. Indeed the presence of four plasmids sharing
no significant homology makes such recombination
events very unlikely even at high production titers.
Sindbis virus and Semliki forest virus vectors
replicate in the cytoplasm
The alphaviruses are a family of enveloped viruses
with a single-strand positive-sense RNA genome. One
of the advantages of using such RNA viruses for gene
transfer is that integration into the host genome
is guaranteed never to occur. Alphavirus replication takes place in the cytoplasm, and produces a
large numbers of daughter genomes, allowing very
high-level expression of any transgene (reviewed

247

Gene transfer to animal cells

Subgenomic
promoter to drive
expression of
inserted genes

Poly A

Pac I
Not I
Xho I

promoter is placed either upstream or downstream of
the capsid polyprotein gene. If foreign DNA is introduced downstream of this promoter, the replicase
protein produces two distinct subgenomic RNAs, one
corresponding to the transgene. Such insertion vectors
tend to be unstable and have been largely superseded
by replacement vectors in which the capsid polyprotein gene is replaced by the transgene. The first
120 b of both the Sindbis and SFV structural polyprotein genes includes a strong enhancer of protein
synthesis, which significantly increases the yield
of recombinant protein (Sjoberg et al. 1994, Frolov
& Schlesinger 1994). This is downstream of the
translational initiation site, so in many vectors
this enhancer region is included so that the foreign
gene is expressed as an N-terminal fusion protein.
This can result in extremely high levels of recombinant protein synthesis, up to 50% of the total cellular
protein.
Both plasmid replicon and viral transduction
vectors have been developed from the alphavirus
genome. A versatile Sindbis replicon vector, pSinRep5,
is currently marketed by Invitrogen (Fig. 12.15). The
vector is a plasmid containing bacterial backbone
elements, the Sindbis replicase genes and packaging
site, and an expression cassette featuring a Sindbis
subgenomic promoter, a multiple cloning site, and
a polyadenylation site. There is an SP6 promoter
upstream of the replicase genes and expression cassette for generating full-length in vitro transcripts.
There is a second set of restriction sites downstream from the polylinker, allowing the vector to be

Xba I
Mlu I
Pml I
Sph I
Stu I
Apa I

by Berglung et al. 1996). To date, these are the only
animal viruses with a replication cycle based solely
on RNA to be extensively developed as expression
vectors. Sindbis virus (Xiong et al. 1989) and Semliki
forest virus (SFV) (Liljestrom & Garoff 1993) have been
the focus of much of this research. These display a
broad host range and cell tropism, and mutants have
been isolated with reduced cytopathic effects (Agapov
et al. 1998, Frolov et al. 1999; reviewed by Schlesinger
2001, Rayner et al. 2002, Lundstrom 2003).
The wild-type alphavirus comprises two genes, a
5′ gene encoding viral replicase and a 3′ gene encoding a polyprotein from which the capsid structural
proteins are autocatalytically derived. Since the
genome is made of RNA, it can act immediately as a
substrate for protein synthesis. However, because
protein synthesis in eukaryotes is dependent on
mRNAs possessing a specialized 5′ cap structure,
only the replicase gene is initially translated. The
replicase protein produces a negative sense complementary strand, which in turn acts as a template
for the production of full-length daughter genomes.
However, the negative strand also contains an
internal promoter which allows the synthesis of a
subgenomic positive sense RNA containing the
capsid polyprotein gene. This subgenomic RNA is
subsequently capped and translated.
A number of different strategies have been used
to express recombinant proteins using alphavirus
vectors (Berglung et al. 1996, Lundstrom 1997). For
example, replication-competent vectors have been
constructed in which an additional subgenomic

PSG

3’ restriction sites for
linearization prior to
in vitro transcription

Am
pic

illin

IE1
Co

en
es

PS

SP6

Fig. 12.15 The
Sindbis virus-based
vector pSinRep5.
(Reproduced with
permission from
Invitrogen.)

pSinRep5

lG
ra
tu
uc
str
Non

Nonstructural
genes (nsP1–4)
for in vitro
replication of
recombinant
RNA

1–

4 (R
epli
case)

SP6 promoter
for synthesis of
in vitro RNA
transcripts

Packaging signal
allows recombinant
RNA to be packaged
into virus

248

CHAPTER 12

linearized prior to in vitro transcription. Foreign
DNA is cloned in the expression cassette, the vector
is linearized and transcribed, and the infectious
recombinant Sindbis RNA thus produced is transfected into cells, from which recombinant protein
can be recovered. An alternative strategy is to place
the entire alphavirus genome under the control of a
standard eukaryotic promoter such as SV40, and
transfect cells with the DNA. In this case, the DNA
expressed in the nucleus and the recombinant
vector RNA is exported into the cytoplasm. Such
DNA vectors have been described for Sindbis and
SFV ( Johanning et al. 1995, Herweijer et al. 1995,
Berglund et al. 1996). Transduction is a more suitable delivery procedure for gene-therapy applications, and in this case a replicon vector like pSinRep5
is co-introduced with a defective helper plasmid
supplying the missing structural proteins. This
facilitates one round of replication and packaging
and the production of recombinant viral particles
that can be isolated from the extracellular fluid.
In the original packaging system, the replicon and
helper vectors could undergo recombination to produce moderate amounts of contaminating wild-type
virus. This problem has been addressed by supplying
the structural protein genes on multiple plasmids
(Smerdou & Liljestrom 1999) and by the development of complementary cell lines producing the
structural proteins (Polo et al. 1999).
Vaccinia and other poxvirus vectors are
widely used for vaccine delivery
Vaccinia virus is closely related to variola virus,
the agent responsible for smallpox. A world-wide
vaccination program using vaccinia virus resulted
in the elimination of smallpox as an infectious disease. The success of the program raised hopes that
recombinant vaccinia viruses, carrying genes from
other pathogens, could be used as live vaccines for
other infectious diseases.
The poxviruses have a complex structure and
a large double-stranded linear DNA genome (up to
300 kb). Unusually for a DNA virus, the poxviruses
replicate in the cytoplasm of the infected cell rather
than its nucleus. Part of the reason for the large
genome and structural complexity is that the virus
must encode and package all its own DNA replication and transcription machinery, which most DNA
viruses “borrow” from the host cell nucleus.
The unusual replication strategy and large size of
the vaccinia genome make the design and construc-

tion of expression vectors more complex than for
other viruses (Guo & Bartlett 2004). Since the virus
normally packages its own replication and transcription enzymes, recombinant genomes introduced into
cells by transfection are non-infectious. Recombinant
viruses are therefore generated by homologous recombination, using a targeting plasmid transfected
into virus-infected cells. More recently, direct ligation vectors have been developed, and these are
transfected into cells containing a helper virus to
supply replication and transcription enzymes in trans
(Merchlinsky et al. 1997). Recombinant vectors
can be identified by hybridization to the large viral
plaques that form on permissive cells. However, the
efficiency of this process can be improved by various
selection regimes. In one strategy, the transgene is
inserted into the viral Tk gene and negative selection
using the thymidine analog 5-bromodeoxyuridine
is carried out to enrich for potential recombinants
(Mackett et al. 1982). In another, the transgene is
inserted into the viral hemagglutinin locus. If chicken
erythrocytes are added to the plate of infected cells,
wild-type plaques turn red whereas the recombinant
plaques remain clear (Shida 1986). Since vaccinia
vectors have a high capacity for foreign DNA, selectable markers such as neo (Franke et al. 1985) or
screenable markers such as lacZ (Chakrabarti et al.
1985) or gusA (Carroll & Moss 1995) can be cointroduced with the experimental transgene to
identify recombinants.
Transgene expression usually needs to be driven
by an endogenous vaccinia promoter, since transcription relies on proteins supplied by the virus.
The highest expression levels are provided by late
promoters such as P11, allowing the production of
up to 1 µg of protein per 106 cells, but other promoters such as P7.5 and 4b are used, especially where
expression early in the infection cycle is desired
(Cochran et al. 1985, Bertholet et al. 1985). A synthetic late promoter, whose use allows up to 2 µg of
protein to be produced per 106 cells, has also been
developed (Lundstrom 1997). Since the cytoplasm
lacks not only host transcription factors but also the
nuclear splicing apparatus, vaccinia vectors cannot
be used to express genes with introns. Furthermore,
the sequence TTTTTNT must be removed from all
foreign DNA sequences expressed in vaccinia vectors,
since the virus uses this motif as a transcriptional
terminator. A useful binary expression system has
been developed, in which the transgene is driven
by the bacteriophage T7 promoter and the T7 polymerase itself is expressed in a vaccinia vector under

249

Gene transfer to animal cells

the control of a vaccinia promoter (Fuerst et al. 1986).
Initially, the transgene was placed on a plasmid
vector and transfected into cells infected with the
recombinant vaccinia virus, but higher expression
levels (up to 10% total cellular protein) can be
achieved using two vaccinia vectors, one carrying
the T7-driven transgene and one expressing the
polymerase (Fuerst et al. 1987).
In an early demonstration that vaccinia virus could
be used to express antigens from other infectious
agents, Smith et al. (1983a) replaced the vaccinia
Tk locus with a transgene encoding hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBSAg). The transgene was cloned
in a plasmid containing the vaccinia thymidine
kinase gene, interrupted by one of the vaccinia
early promoters. This plasmid was transfected into
vaccinia-infected monkey cells, and recombinant
vectors carrying the transgene were selected using
5-bromodeoxyuridine. Cells infected with this virus
secreted large amounts of HBSAg into the culture
medium, and vaccinated rabbits rapidly produced
high-titer antibodies to HBSAg. Similarly, vaccinia
viruses expressing the influenza hemagglutinin gene
were used to immunize hamsters, and induce resistance to influenza (Smith et al. 1983a). Recombinant

vaccinia viruses have been constructed expressing a range of important antigens, including HIV
and HTLV-III envelope proteins (Hu et al. 1986,
Chakrabarti et al. 1986). In many cases, recombinant vectors have been shown to provide immunity
when administered to animals (reviewed by
Moss 1996). For example, monkeys infected with
recombinant vaccinia and canarypox vectors have
shown resistance to SIV and HIV-2 (Hirsch et al.
1996, Myagkikh et al. 1996). Several recombinant
poxviruses have progressed to phase 1 clinical trials,
including a vaccine against the Epstein–Barr major
membrane antigen (Gu et al. 1996). The immunization of wild foxes, using tainted meat, with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the rabies virus
glycoprotein appears to have eliminated the disease
from Belgium (Brochier et al. 1991).

Summary of expression systems for
animal cells
A variety of gene transfer and expression systems
have been discussed in this chapter, and Table 12.5
provides a summary of these systems and their major

Table 12.5 Summary of major expression systems used in animal cells.

System

Host

Major applications

Non-replicating plasmid vectors
No selection
Dominant selectable markers
DHFR/methotrexate

Many cell lines
Many cell lines
CHO cells

Transient assays
Stable transformation, long-term expression
Stable transformation, high-level expression

Plasmids with viral replicons
SV40 replicons
BPV replicons
EBV replicons

COS cells
Various murine
Various human

High-level transient expression
Stable transformation (episomal)
Stable transformation (episomal), library
construction

293 cells
Various mammalian
Various mammalian
Insects
Various mammalian
Various mammalian
Various mammalian and avian
ES cells
Non-dividing cells, mammalian
Various mammalian
Various mammalian

Transient expression
In vivo transfer
In vivo transfer
High-level transient expression
In vivo transfer
Stable transformation
Stable transformation
Transgenic mice (Chapter 13)
In vivo transfer
High-level transient expression
High-level transient expression

Viral transduction vectors
Adenovirus E1 replacement
Adenovirus amplicons
Adeno-associated virus
Baculovirus
Herpesvirus
Oncoretrovirus
Lentivirus
Sindbis, Semliki forest virus
Vaccinia virus

250

CHAPTER 12

applications. Many factors influence the expression
of foreign genes in animal cells, and an understanding of these factors allows transgene expression to
be controlled. For the production of recombinant
proteins, it is often appropriate to maximize transgene expression, and principles for achieving this
are shown in Box 12.2. In other cases, it may be
desirable to switch the transgene on and off using
inducible expression systems. We explore these
considerations in more detail in Chapter 15.

Suggested reading
Blesch A. (2004) Lentiviral and MLV based retroviral
vectors for ex vivo and in vivo gene transfer. Methods
33, 164–72.
Calderwood N.A., White R.E. & Whitehouse A. (2004)
Development of herpesvirus-based episomally maintained gene delivery vectors. Expert Opinion in Biological Theory 4, 493–505.
Chou T.W., Biswas S. & Lu S. (2004) Gene delivery
using physical methods: an overview. In: Heiser W.C.
(ed.) Gene Delivery to Mammalian Cells. Volume 1 –
Nonviral Gene Transfer Techniques. Humana Press,
Towata NJ, pp. 147–65.
Davis M.E. (2002) Non-viral gene delivery systems.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 13, 128–31.
Flotte T.R. (2004) Gene therapy progress and prospects:
recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors.
Gene Therapy 11, 805–10.

Guo Z.S. & Bartlett D.L. (2004) Vaccinia as a vector
for gene delivery. Expert Opinion in Biological Theory
4, 901–17.
Higgins D.E. & Portnoy D.A. (1998) Bacterial delivery
of DNA evolves. Nature Biotechnology 16, 138–9.
Imperiale M.J. & Kochanek S. (2004) Adenovirus
vectors: biology, design, and production. Current Topics
in Microbiology 273, 335–57.
Keown W.A., Campbell C.R. & Kucherlapati R.S. (1990)
Methods for introducing DNA into mammalian cells.
Methods in Enzymology 185, 527–37.
Liu D., Chiao E.F. & Tian H. (2004) Chemical methods
for DNA delivery: an overview. In: Heiser W.C. (ed.)
Gene Delivery to Mammalian Cells. Volume 1 – Nonviral
Gene Transfer Techniques. Humana Press, Towata NJ,
pp. 3–23.
Possee R.D. (1997) Baculoviruses as expression vectors.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 8, 569–72.
Schlesinger S. & Dubensky T.W., Jr. (1999) Alphaviruses
for gene expression and vaccines. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology 10, 434–9.
Van Craenenbroeck K., Vanhoenacker P. & Haegeman
G. (2000) Episomal vectors for gene expression in
mammalian cells. European Journal of Biochemistry
267, 5665–8.
Weiss S. & Chakraborty T. (2001) Transfer of eukaryotic expression plasmids to mammalian host cells by
bacterial carriers. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2,
467–72.
Yokoyama M. (2002) Gene delivery using temperatureresponsive polymeric carriers. Drug Discovery Today
7, 426–32.

CHAPTER 13
Genetic manipulation of animals

Introduction
The genetic manipulation of animals has revolutionized our understanding of biology by making it
possible to test gene expression and function at the
whole-animal level. Gene-transfer techniques can be
used to produce transgenic animals, in which every
cell carries new genetic information. Similarly, it is
possible to introduce specific, pre-selected mutations
to the animal genome. The whole animal is the ultimate assay system in which to investigate gene function, particularly for complex biological processes
such as development.
Whereas transgenic plants can be regenerated
from transformed plant cells or tissue explants, the
same cannot be achieved directly in animals. Two
fundamental differences between animals and plants
make this so. First, animal cells become progressively
restricted in their potency as development proceeds.
This means that differentiated animal cells are normally unable to dedifferentiate fully and recapitulate the developmental program. Secondly, in most
animals, the somatic cells and germ cells (the cells
that give rise to gametes) separate at an early developmental stage. Therefore, the only way to achieve
germline transformation directly in animals is to
introduce DNA into totipotent cells prior to the
developmental stage at which the germline forms.
In most cases, this involves introducing DNA into
the developing oocyte, egg, or early embryo. In mice,
it is also possible to use cultured embryonic stem (ES)
cells, which are derived from the preimplantation
embryo and can contribute to all the tissues of the
developing animal (including the germline) if introduced into a host embryo at the correct developmental
stage. These cells are also remarkably amenable to
homologous recombination, which allows them to
be used for gene targeting, the accurate replacement
of a segment of the endogenous genome with a homologous segment of exogenous DNA. Gene targeting
can be used to replace endogenous genes with a

completely non-functional copy (a null allele) or to
make subtle changes, both allowing the function of
the endogenous gene to be tested. The same technology can be used for the opposite purpose, i.e. to
replace a mutant allele with a functional copy.
While rapid progress has been made with a range
of model organisms, particularly Drosophila, Xenopus,
and the mouse, great potential exists for the production of transgenic farm animals with improved or
novel traits. The technology for introducing DNA
into animals such as chickens, pigs, cattle, and sheep
is still in its infancy and is much less efficient than
that of mice. Furthermore, it has proven impossible
thus far to isolate amenable ES cells from any of our
domestic mammals. The desire to generate transgenic livestock has driven research in a different
direction, that of nuclear transfer. Although differentiated animal cells are developmentally restricted,
their nuclei still contain all the genetic information
required to recapitulate the whole of development.
Dolly, the first sheep produced following nuclear
transfer from a differentiated adult somatic cell to
an enucleated egg, has opened the way for animal
cloning and the rapid production of élite transgenic
herds.

Three major methods have been developed
for the production of transgenic mice
The ability to introduce DNA into the germline of mice
is one of the greatest achievements of the twentieth
century and has paved the way for the transformation of other mammals. Genetically modified mammals have been used not only to study gene function
and regulation, but also as bioreactors producing
valuable recombinant proteins, e.g. in their milk.
Several methods for germline transformation have
been developed, all of which require the removal of
fertilized eggs or early embryos from donor mothers,
brief culture in vitro, and then their return to foster

252

CHAPTER 13

Attach DNA
to sperm
DNA transfection

Unfertilized
mouse egg

Adult cells

Nuclear
replacement
Embryonic stem
(ES) cells

Recombinant
retroviral infection

Fertilized egg

DNA
microinjection

Cell transfer
Early cleavage

Blastocyst

Embryonic
development

mothers, where development continues to term.
These methods are discussed below and summarized
in Fig. 13.1. Note that these methods have been
developed with nuclear transgenesis in mind, but
mitochondria have their own genome. Recently,
methods have been developed for the production of
mitochondrial transgenics (or transmitochondrial
mice), which are considered in Box 13.1.
Pronuclear microinjection involves the direct
transfer of DNA into the male pronucleus of
the fertilized mouse egg
Direct microinjection of DNA was the first strategy
used to generate transgenic mice. Simian virus 40
(SV40) DNA was injected into the blastocoele cavities of preimplantation embryos by Jaenisch & Mintz
(1974). The embryos were then implanted into the
uteri of foster mothers and allowed to develop. The
DNA was taken up by some of the embryonic cells
and occasionally contributed to the germline, resulting in transgenic mice containing integrated SV40
DNA in the following generation. Transgenic mice
have also been recovered following the injection of
viral DNA into the cytoplasm of the fertilized egg
(Harbers et al. 1981).

Fig. 13.1 Summary
of methods for
producing transgenic
mammals.

The technique that has become established is the
injection of DNA into one of the pronuclei of the egg
(reviewed by Palmiter & Brinster 1986). The technique is shown in Fig. 13.2. Just after fertilization,
the small egg nucleus (female pronucleus) and the
large sperm nucleus (male pronucleus) are discrete.
Since the male pronucleus is larger, this is usually
chosen as the target for injection. About 2 pl of DNA
solution is transferred into the nucleus through a
fine needle, while the egg is held in position with a
suction pipette. The injected embryos are cultured in
vitro to the morula stage and then transferred to
pseudopregnant foster mothers (Gordon & Ruddle
1981). The procedure requires specialized microinjection equipment and considerable dexterity
from the handler. The exogenous DNA may integrate immediately or, less commonly, may remain
extrachromosomal for one or more cell divisions.
Thus the resulting animal may be transgenic or may
be mosaic for transgene insertion. The technique
is reliable, although the efficiency varies, so that
5–40% of mice developing from manipulated eggs
contain the transgene (Lacy et al. 1983). However,
once the transgene is transmitted through the germline, it tends to be stably inherited over many generations. The exogenous DNA tends to form head-to-tail

253

Genetic manipulation of animals

Box 13.1 Mitochondrial transgenesis in mice
Several human genetic diseases are caused
by mitochondrial mutations, and to model
such diseases it is necessary to introduce DNA
into the mitochondrial genome of suitable
animals. This cannot be achieved using
standard transgenesis techniques and a
novel method has been developed in which
donor cell lines carrying mitochondrial
mutations are enucleated and then fused
with recipient mouse zygotes. The resulting
transmitochondrial mice carry the mutation in
every cell and pass the mutation through the
female germline, since mitochondria in the
sperm only rarely contribute to the embryo.
The procedure for producing
transmitochondrial mice is shown in
Fig. B13.1. This involves five distinct steps.
First, a cell line must be produced carrying
mitochondria containing the appropriate
transgene or mitochondrial mutation. There
are many ways to achieve this, but one of
the most efficient is fusion between cells
depleted in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
and synaptosomes from aged mice which
often contain mtDNA deletions and other
mutations. The resulting cell lines are called
cybrids because their cytoplasm is a hybrid of
two cell lines. The next step is to remove the
nucleus from the cybrid cells, so that they
can act as mitochondrial donors without
introducing additional nuclei into the egg.
This is generally achieved by centrifugation in
the presence of cytochalasin B. After washing
the enucleated cybrids, zygotes are collected
from donor females and a micromanipulator is
used to drill a hole through the zona pellucida
and place the cybrids in the perivitelline space.
After a brief recovery period in culture, embryos
containing cybrids are washed in a medium
that promotes fusion and placed between the

arrays prior to integration, and the copy number
varies from a few copies to hundreds. The site of
integration appears random and may depend on
the occurrence of natural chromosome breaks.
Extensive deletions and rearrangements of the
genomic DNA often accompany transgene integration (Bishop & Smith 1989).

Embryo donor

(1) Establishment
a mouse cell line
with mtDNA mutation
(2) Enucleation

A A

Pronuclear stage
embryo

Cytoplasts

(3) Electrofusion
Insert into the
perivitelline space

A A

Embryo culture

(4) Embryo
transfer
Pseudopregnant
mouse

Foster
mother
F0 mice

(5) Analysis

Fig. B13.1 Procedure for generating
transmitochondrial mice. See text for details.

electrodes of a fusion chamber. A long AC
pulse (225 V, 10–15 s) is used to align the
cytoplasts and oocytes, and then a brief DC
pulse (2500 V, 20 ms) is used to induce fusion,
which occurs within the next hour. After a
brief recovery period in culture, the fused
embryos are implanted into pseudopregnant
foster mothers and raised to term.

Recombinant retroviruses can be used to
transduce early embryos prior to the
formation of the germline
As discussed in Chapter 12, recombinant retroviruses
provide a natural mechanism for stably introducing
DNA into the genome of animal cells. Retroviruses

254

CHAPTER 13

Fig. 13.2 Pronuclear microinjection of a fertilized mouse egg. The two pronuclei are visible, and the egg is held using a suction
pipette. The DNA is introduced through a fine glass needle. (Photograph courtesy of Roslin Institute.)

are able to infect early embryos (as well as ES cells,
see below), so recombinant retroviral vectors can be
used for germline transformation (Robertson et al.
1986). An advantage over the microinjection technique is that only a single copy of the retroviral
provirus is integrated, and the genomic DNA surrounding the transgenic locus generally remains
intact. The infection of preimplantation embryos
with a recombinant retrovirus is technically straightforward and, once the infected embryos are implanted
in the uterus of a foster mother, can lead to germline
transmission of the transgene. However, there are
also considerable disadvantages to this method,
including the limited amount of foreign DNA that
can be carried by the virus, the possible interference
of viral regulatory elements with the expression
of surrounding genes, and the susceptibility of the
virus to de novo methylation, resulting in transgene
silencing. The founder embryos are always mosaics
with respect to transgene integration (reviewed by
Jaenisch 1988). Retroviral transduction is therefore
not favored as a method for generating fully transgenic animals, but it is useful for generating transgenic sectors of embryos. For example, the analysis
of chicken-limb buds infected with recombinant

retroviruses has allowed many of the genes involved
in limb development to be functionally characterized
(see review by Tickle & Eichele 1994).
Transgenic mice can be produced by the
transfection of ES cells followed by the
creation of chimeric embryos
ES cells are derived from the inner cell mass of the
mouse blastocyst and thus have the potential to contribute to all tissues of the developing embryo (Evans
& Kaufman 1981, Martin 1981). The ability of ES cells
to contribute to the germline was first demonstrated
by Bradley et al. (1984) and requires culture conditions that maintain the cells in an undifferentiated
state (Joyner 1998). Since these cells can be serially
cultured like any other established cell line, DNA can
be introduced by transfection or viral transduction
and the transformed cells can be selected using standard markers, as discussed in Chapter 12. In contrast,
since there is no convenient way to select for eggs
or embryos that have taken up foreign DNA, each
potential transgenic mouse generated by pronuclear
microinjection must be tested by Southern blot hybridization or the PCR to confirm transgene integration.

255

Genetic manipulation of animals

129
Isolate
blastocyst

Isolate inner
cell mass
Cultured ES cells

Inner cell
mass

Gene targeting
or insertion of
transgene

Reimplant
into foster
mother

C57BL/6J

Fig. 13.3 Procedure
for generating
transgenic mice using
transformed ES cells.
The ES cells, which are
manipulated in culture,
contribute potentially
to all the tissues of the
embryo, including the
germline. Germline
transmission of the
transgene can be
confirmed by checking
that offspring of
chimeric embryos
carry ES cell coat
color markers.

of blastocyst
from a different
mouse strain
C57B10/J

Genetically modified
ES cells

×
Chimera

C57B10/J
Mating

Mouse
containing
(heterozygous)
genetic
modification
in all nucleated
cells

Transfected ES that survive selection are introduced into the blastocoele of a host embryo at the
blastocyst stage, where they mix with the inner cell
mass. This creates a true chimeric embryo.1 The
contribution of ES cells to the germline can thus be
confirmed using visible markers. Most ES cell lines
in common use are derived from mouse strain 129,
which has the dominant coat color agouti. A popular
strategy is to use host embryos from a mouse strain
such as C57BL/6J, which has a recessive black coat
color. Colonization of the embryo by vigorous ES
cells can be substantial, generating chimeras with

1

Inject into cavity

Organisms which are mixtures of genetically distinct cells
may be described as either mosaics or chimeras, but the two
terms have distinct meanings. A mosaic is a mixture of genetically distinct cells which nevertheless have a common ancestor. This would apply, for example, to two lineages of cells in
an animal which have arisen by mutation, or by transgene
integration. A chimera on the other hand is a mixture of
genetically distinct cells with different ancestors, as occurs
when ES cells from one mouse line are injected into the
blastocoele of another mouse line.

patchwork coats of black and agouti cell clones. If
the ES cells have contributed to the germline, mating
chimeric males with black females will generate heterozygous transgenic offspring with the agouti coat
color, confirming germline transmission of the foreign DNA. Most ES cells in use today are derived from
male embryos, resulting in a large sex bias towards
male chimeras (McMahon & Bradley 1990). This is
desirable because male chimeras sire many more
offspring than females. The procedure for generating
transgenic mice using ES cells is shown in Fig. 13.3.

ES cells can be used for gene targeting
in mice
Pronuclear microinjection and retroviral transfer
are useful for the addition of DNA to the mouse
genome. However, in many cases it is desirable to
modify the endogenous genome in a specific manner, such as introducing a defined mutation in a
selected gene. In yeast, gene targeting by homologous

256

CHAPTER 13

Targeting vector

2

1

2

×

3

×
Homologous target

4

Integration (ends-in)

1

2

3*

Targeting vector

1

3*

2

3

4

1

4

×
2

3

4

Transplacement (ends-out)

1

4

Fig. 13.4 Structure and integration mechanisms of the two major types of targeting vector, (a) insertion and (b) transplacement.
Regions of homology between the vector and target are designated by the same number.

recombination occurs with high efficiency (Chapter 11). In contrast, when the first gene-targeting
experiments in animal cells were carried out in the
1980s, only a very low frequency of targeted recombination was achieved. These experiments involved
the correction of mutations in selectable markers
such as neo, which had been introduced into cell lines
as transgenes by standard methods (e.g. Thomas
et al. 1986). Smithies et al. (1985) were the first to
demonstrate targeting of an endogenous gene. They
introduced a modified β-globin gene containing the
bacterial marker supF into a human fibroblast x
mouse erythroleukemia cell line and screened large
numbers of potential recombinants by re-isolating
the modified locus, using supF as a cloning tag. This
experiment demonstrated that the frequency of
homologous recombination was up to 1000-fold
lower than that of random integration. Targeting
occurs with significantly higher efficiency in certain
cell lines, including mouse ES cells. The combination
of pluripotency, amenability for in vitro manipulation, and capacity for homologous recombination
makes ES cells uniquely suitable for the generation
of targeted mutant mice, i.e. mice carrying the same
mutation in every cell and transmitting it through the
germline. Gene targeting in ES cells was first achieved
by Thomas & Capecchi (1987), who disrupted the
hprt gene with the neo marker and selected recombinant cells using either G418 or 6-thioguanine, a
toxic guanine analog that is only incorporated into
DNA if the nucleotide salvage pathway is functional
(see p. 224). Doetschman et al. (1987) also successfully targeted the hprt locus, although they used a
mutant recipient cell line and repaired the locus with
homologous DNA, subsequently selecting on HAT
medium (see p. 225).

Gene-targeting vectors may disrupt genes
by insertion or replacement
Targeting vectors are specialized plasmid vectors
that promote homologous recombination when
introduced into ES cells. This is achieved by the
inclusion of a homology region, i.e. a region that is
homologous to the target gene, allowing the targeting vector to synapse with the endogenous DNA.
Both the size of the homology region and the level
of sequence identity have been shown to play an
important role in the efficiency of gene targeting
(Hasty et al. 1991b, Deng & Capecchi 1992, Te Riele
et al. 1992). Recombination is also more efficient if
the vector is linearized prior to transfection.
Most gene-targeting experiments have been used
to disrupt endogenous loci, resulting in targeted null
alleles (this strategy is often termed “gene knockout”).
Two types of targeting vector have been developed
for this purpose: insertion vectors and replacement
(or transplacement) vectors (Thomas & Capecchi
1987; Fig. 13.4). Insertion vectors are linearized
within the homology region, resulting in the insertion of the entire vector into the target locus. This
type of vector disrupts the target gene but leads to a
duplication of the sequences adjacent to the selectable marker. This is not always a desirable configuration, since duplication of the target sequences can
lead to a subsequent homologous recombination
event that restores the wild-type genotype (Fiering
et al. 1995). Replacement vectors are designed so
that the homology region is co-linear with the target. The vector is linearized outside the homology
region prior to transfection, resulting in crossover
events in which the endogenous DNA is replaced by
the incoming DNA. With this type of vector, only

Genetic manipulation of animals

sequences within the homology region (not the vector backbone) are inserted, so the homology region
itself must be interrupted to achieve gene knockout.
Insertion and replacement vectors are thought to be
equally efficient, but replacement vectors have been
used in the majority of knockout experiments. In
both cases, however, it is possible for transcription
to occur through the targeted locus, producing low
amounts of RNA. This may be spliced in such a way
as to remove the targeted exon, resulting in a residual amount of functional protein (e.g. Dorin et al.
1994, Dahme et al. 1997).
Sophisticated selection strategies have been
developed to isolate rare gene-targeting events
The first gene-targeting experiments involved the
selectable Hprt locus, which is present on the X
chromosome, allowing targeted events to be selected
in male ES cells without the requirement for homozygosity. The first non-selectable genes to be targeted
were int-2 (also known as fgf-3) (Mansour et al.
1988) and the oncogene c-abl (Schwartzberg et al.
1989). In each case, it was necessary to include a
selectable marker in the targeting vector to identify
transformed cells. In the case of insertion vectors this
is placed anywhere on the vector backbone, while in
replacement vectors the marker must interrupt the
homology region. The neo marker has been most
commonly used, allowing transformed ES cells to
be selected using G418. However, other dominant
markers are equally applicable (e.g. see Von Melchner
et al. 1992), and Hprt can be used in combination
with hprt– mutant ES cells (Matzuk et al. 1992).
The use of a single marker fails to discriminate
between targeted cells and those where the construct has integrated randomly. This problem can be
addressed by combined positive-negative selection
using neo and the herpes simplex virus (HSV) Tk gene
(Mansour et al. 1988). If the neo marker is used to
interrupt the homology region in a replacement vector, transformed cells can be selected using G418.
The HSV Tk gene is placed outside the homology
region, such that it is inserted by random integration
but not by homologous recombination. Therefore,
cells that have undergone homologous recombination will survive in the presence of the toxic thymidine
analogs ganciclovir or FIAU (1-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-βD-arabinofuranosyl)-5-iodouracil), while in those
cells containing randomly integrated copies of the Tk
gene, the analogs will be incorporated into the DNA,
resulting in cell death.

257

A different strategy is to make expression of the
neo gene dependent on homologous recombination,
which is achieved by having no promoter in the
vector (promoterless neo vector). Under these circumstances, the neo gene is not expressed following
random integration, but comes under the control of
the endogenous gene’s promoter following a genuine
targeting event (e.g. see Schwartzberg et al. 1989,
Mansour et al. 1993). This method works only if the
endogenous gene is normally expressed in ES cells.
Another alternative to positive-negative selection,
which is used in many laboratories, is simply to screen
large numbers of G418-resistant transfected cells by
the PCR to identify genuine recombinants (Hogan &
Lyons 1988, Zimmer & Gruss 1989). Screening can
be carried out relatively quickly without recourse to
cloning.
Two rounds of gene targeting allow the
introduction of subtle mutations
While gene targeting has often been used to disrupt
and hence inactivate specific endogenous genes by
introducing large insertions, more refined approaches
can be used to generate subtle mutations. The precise
effects of minor deletions or point mutations cannot
be assessed using the simple targeting strategies discussed above, which necessarily leave the selectable
marker and, in some cases, the entire targeting vector
integrated at the target site. Furthermore, many
investigators have reported that the strong promoters
used to drive marker-gene expression can affect the
regulation of neighboring genes, in some cases up to
100 kb away from the targeted locus (Pham et al.
1996). Two major strategies for the introduction of
subtle mutations have been devised, each involving
two rounds of homologous recombination. These
are the “hit-and-run” strategy, involving a single
insertion vector, and the “tag-and-exchange” strategy, involving two replacement vectors (Fig. 13.5).
Strategies involving Cre recombinase have also been
developed and are discussed on p. 307.
The “hit-and-run” or “in-out” strategy (Hasty et al.
1991a, Valancius & Smithies 1991) involves the
use of an insertion vector carrying two selectable
markers, such as neo and Tk. The insertion event is
positively selected using G418. As discussed above,
the use of an insertion vector results in duplication of
the homology region in the targeted clone, although
in this case the homology region derived from the
vector is modified to contain the desired subtle mutation. The success of this strategy relies on a second

258

CHAPTER 13

Second replacement vector
(containing subtle mutation)

Intrachromosomal
recombination
1

2

1

3*

×

×
2

3

2

3*

1

4

×
4

4

Second round
transplacement

1

2

3*

4

Mutation

1

2

3*

4

Fig. 13.5 Procedure for the introduction of subtle mutations using (a) an insertion vector and (b) two transplacement vectors.
Regions of homology between the vector and target are designated by the same number. An asterisk indicates the position of a
point mutation in the vector, which is to be introduced at the target locus.

intrachromosomal homologous recombination event,
which replaces the endogenous allele with the mutant
and deletes the markers, allowing the second-round
recombinants to survive in the presence of ganciclovir. However, the second homologous recombination event occurs at a very low frequency and, in
50% of cases, restores the locus to its original wildtype configuration.
The “tag-and-exchange” strategy also requires
two homologous recombination events, but in this
case two replacement-type vectors are used. For
example, Moore et al. (1995) demonstrated the
principle using neo for positive selection and HSV
Tk for negative selection. The first “tag” vector was
designed to mutate the target gene by inserting a
large cassette containing the selectable markers.
This event was positively selected with G418. The
second “exchange” vector introduced the desired
mutation and eliminated the selectable markers,
allowing the second-round recombinants to be
selected for the absence of Tk.
Recent advances in gene-targeting
technology
The low efficiency of gene targeting in mammalian
somatic cells, particularly human cells, is a significant bottleneck in the use of this technique for
applications such as gene therapy. Therefore, many
researchers have looked at ways to increase the frequency of targeting events by manipulating the
cellular recombination machinery, either by the
application of chemical inhibitors or through genetic
intervention. One example of the former approach is
the application of 1,5-isoquinolinediol, an inhibitor
of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). This was

shown to increase the frequency of gene-targeting
events in mouse fibroblasts by tenfold (Semionov
et al. 2003). Targets for genetic manipulation include
genes involved in homologous and illegitimate
recombination, some of which have been identified
through mutations that inhibit gene targeting.
Examples include the mouse Rad51, whose overexpression in ES cells significantly increased the frequency of gene targeting (Dominguez-Bendala et al.
2003) and the human RAD52 gene, whose overexpression increased the gene-targeting frequency
in a human somatic line (Yanez and Porter 2002).
Zwaka & Thomson (2003) were the first to demonstrate gene targeting in human ES cells, using a
promoterless neo vector to target the HPRT1 and
OCT4 loci. However, highly efficient gene targeting
in human cell lines has been demonstrated using
adeno-asociated virus vectors, which give targeting
frequencies of up to 1% (10,000 times more efficiency
than transfection methods) (Russel et al. 1998, 2002,
Hirata et al. 2000, 2002). The introduction of doublestranded DNA breaks at the sites of vector homology
within chromosomal DNA can increase targeting
efficiencies still further when recombinant AAV vectors are used (Porteus et al. 2003, Miller et al. 2003).

Applications of genetically modified mice
Applications of transgenic mice
Transgenic mice, i.e. mice containing additional
transgenes as opposed to those with targeted mutations, have been used to address many aspects of
gene function and regulation. A vast literature has
accumulated on this subject, and genes concerning

Genetic manipulation of animals

every conceivable biological process have been
investigated (e.g. see Houdebine 1997). As well as
their use for basic scientific investigation, transgenic
mice can be used for more applied purposes, such as
models for human disease and the production of
valuable pharmaceuticals. Many mouse models for
human diseases have been generated by gene knockout (see below), but gain-of-function models have also
been generated by adding transgenes. For example,
much information concerning the pathology of prion
diseases has arisen from the study of transgenic mice
expressing mutant prion transgenes (reviewed by
Gabizon & Taraboulos 1997). Transgenic mice expressing oncogenes have been extensively used to
study cancer (reviewed by Macleod & Jacks 1999).
For illustrative purposes, we now consider some
early experiments that demonstrated how transgenic
mice can be used for the analysis of gene function
and regulation, but also highlighted some limitations
of the transgenic approach. Brinster et al. (1981)
constructed plasmids in which the promoter of the
mouse metallothionein-1 (MMT) gene was fused to
the coding region of the HSV Tk gene. The thymidine
kinase (TK) enzyme can be assayed readily and
provides a convenient reporter of MMT promoter
function. The endogenous MMT promoter is inducible
by glucocorticoid hormones and heavy metals, such
as cadmium and zinc, so it was envisaged that the
hybrid transgene, MK (metallothionein-thymidine
kinase), would be similarly regulated. The gene was
injected into the male pronucleus of fertilized eggs,
which were then incubated in vitro in the presence
or absence of cadmium ions (Brinster et al. 1982).
As expected, TK activity was found to be induced by
the metal. By making a range of deletions of mouse
sequences upstream of the MMT promoter sequences,
the minimum region necessary for inducibility was
localized to a stretch of DNA 40–180 nucleotides
upstream of the transcription-initiation site. Additional sequences that potentiate both basal and
induced activities extended to at least 600 bp upstream
of the transcription-initiation site. The mouse egg
was therefore being used in the same way as transfected cell lines, to dissect the activity of a functional
promoter (Gorman et al. 1982b; see Box 12.1).
The same MK fusion gene was injected into embryos,
which were raised to transgenic adults (Brinster et al.
1981). Most of these mice expressed the MK gene
and in such mice there were from one to 150 copies
of the gene. The reporter activity was inducible by
cadmium ions and showed a tissue distribution very
similar to that of metallothionein itself (Palmiter
et al. 1982b). Therefore these experiments showed

259

that DNA sequences necessary for heavy-metal
induction and tissue-specific expression could be
functionally dissected in both eggs and transgenic
mice. For unknown reasons, there was no response
to glucocorticoids in either the egg or the transgenicmouse experiments.
In a dramatic series of experiments, Palmiter et al.
(1982a) fused the MMT promoter to the rat growthhormone gene. This hybrid gene (MGH) was constructed using the same principles as the MK fusion.
Of 21 mice that developed from microinjected eggs,
seven carried the MGH fusion gene and six of these
grew significantly larger than their littermates. The
mice were fed zinc to induce transcription of the
MGH gene, but this did not appear to be absolutely
necessary, since they showed an accelerated growth
rate before being placed on the zinc diet. Mice containing high copy numbers of the MGH gene (20–40
copies per cell) had very high concentrations of growth
hormone in their serum, some 100–800 times above
normal. Such mice grew to almost double the weight
of littermates at 74 days old (Fig. 13.6).
The similarities between the tissue distribution
of normal MMT expression and that of the hybrid
transgenes encouraged the hope that transgenic

Fig. 13.6 Transgenic mouse containing the mouse
metallothionein promoter fused to the rat growth-hormone
gene. The photograph shows two male mice at about 10 weeks
old. The mouse on the left contains the MGH gene and weighs
44 g; his sibling without the gene weighs 29 g. In general, mice
that express the gene grow two to three times as fast as controls
and reach a size up to twice the normal. (Photograph by courtesy
of Dr. R.L. Brinster.)

260

CHAPTER 13

mice would provide a general assay for functionally
dissecting DNA sequences responsible for tissuespecific or developmental regulation of a variety
of genes. However, there were also some unexpected
findings. For example, independently derived transgenic mice carrying the MK transgene showed
significant variations in the levels and patterns of
transgene expression. Furthermore, while transgenic founders transmitted the construct to their
progeny as expected, when reporter activity was

assayed in these offspring the amount of expression
could be very different from that in the parent.
Examples of increased, decreased, or even totally
extinguished expression were found. In some, but
not all, cases, the changes in expression correlated
with changes in methylation of the gene sequences
(Palmiter et al. 1982b). These results provided the
first examples of two complex phenomena, position
effects (Box 13.2) and de novo transgene silencing
(Box 15.2), which often affect integrated transgenes.

Box 13.2 Position effects
Independently derived transgenic animals and
plants carrying the same expression construct
often show variable levels and patterns of
transgene expression. In many cases, such
variation is dependent on the site of transgene
integration, and this phenomenon has been
termed the position effect (reviewed by Wilson
et al. 1990). Position effects result from the
influence of local regulatory elements on the
transgene, as well as the architecture of the
surrounding chromatin. For example, an
integrated transgene may come under the
influence of a local enhancer, resulting in the
alteration of its expression profile to match
that of the corresponding endogenous gene.
The position dependence of the phenomenon
has been demonstrated in mice by isolating
the entire transgenic locus from such an
anomalous line and microinjecting it into
the pronuclei of wild-type eggs, resulting in
“secondary” transgenic lines with normal
transgene expression profiles (Al-Shawi et al.
1990). Position effects are also revealed by
enhancer-trap constructs, which contain a
minimal promoter linked to a reporter gene
(O’Kane & Gehring 1987; see Chapter 15).
Unlike the specific influences of nearby
regulatory elements, chromatin-mediated
position effects are generally non-specific
and repressive. They reflect the integration
of the transgene into a chromosomal
region containing repressed chromatin
(heterochromatin). The molecular features of
heterochromatin, including its characteristic
nucleosome structure, deacetylated histones
and, in many cases, hypermethylated DNA,

spread into the transgene, causing it to be
inactivated (Huber et al. 1996, Pikaart et al.
1998). In some cases, variegated transgene
expression has been reported due to cellautonomous variations in the extent of this
spreading process (reviewed by Heinkoff
1990). Negative chromosomal position effects
can be troublesome in terms of achieving
desirable transgene expression levels and
patterns; thus a number of different strategies
have been used to combat them.
Incorporating dominantly acting
transcriptional control elements
Certain regulatory elements are thought
to act as master-switches, regulating the
expression of genes or gene clusters by
helping to establish an open chromatin
domain. The locus control region (LCR) of the
human b-globin gene cluster is one example
(Forrester et al. 1987). Transgenic mice
carrying a human b-globin transgene driven
by its own promoter show a low frequency of
expression and, in those mice that do express
the transgene, only a low level of the mRNA is
produced (e.g. Magram et al. 1985, Townes
et al. 1985). However, inclusion of the LCR
in the expression construct confers high-level
and position-independent expression
(Grosveld et al. 1987). There is evidence
that LCRs induce chromatin remodeling
over large distances. For example, the murine
immunoglobulin heavy-chain LCR has been
shown to induce histone acetylation in a
linked c-myc gene (Madisen et al. 1998).
continued

Genetic manipulation of animals

Box 13.2
This suggests that LCRs could protect against
position effects by converting heterochromatin
to open euchromatin at the site of transgene
integration (Festenstein et al. 1996, Milot et al.
1996). The interested reader can consult
several comprehensive reviews of LCR research
(Bonifer 1999, Grosveld 1999, Li et al. 1999).
Using boundary elements/matrix
attachment regions
Boundary elements (insulators) are sequences
that can block the activity of enhancers when
placed between the enhancer and a test
transgene driven by a minimal promoter.
For example, an “A element” with insulator
activity is found upstream of the chicken
lysozyme gene. This inhibits the activity of a
reporter gene when interposed between the
promoter and an upstream enhancer, but not
when placed elsewhere in the construct (Stief
et al. 1989). However, by flanking the entire
construct with a pair of A elements, the
transgene is protected from chromosomal
position effects (Stief et al. 1989). This
protective effect works not only in cell lines,
but also in transgenic animals (McKnight et al.
1992) and plants (Mlynarova et al. 1994).
Many boundary elements are associated with
matrix-attachment regions (MARs), sequences
dispersed throughout the genome that attach
to the nuclear matrix, dividing chromosomes
into topologically independent loops
(reviewed by Spiker & Thompson 1996).
It is therefore possible that transgenes
flanked by such elements are maintained
in an isolated chromatin domain into which
heterochromatin cannot spread. However,
not all boundary elements are associated
with MARs (e.g. see Mirkovitch et al. 1984).
Similarly, some MARs do not function as
boundary elements but as facilitators of gene
expression (e.g. Van der Geest & Hall 1997).
Using large genomic transgenes
Conventional transgenes generally comprise
complementary DNAs (cDNAs) or intronless
“minigenes” expressed under the control of

261

continued
viral promoters or cell-type-specific regulatory
elements. Such transgenes are highly sensitive
to position effects. Over the last few years,
there has been an increasing appreciation that
the regulation of eukaryotic gene expression is
far more complex and involves much more
upstream and downstream DNA than
previously thought (reviewed by Bonifer 1999,
2000). The correct, high-level expression of
transgenes is favored by the use of genomic
constructs that include introns and large
amounts of flanking sequence from the source
gene (e.g. see Bonifer et al. 1990, Lien et al.
1997, Nielsen et al. 1998). Such constructs
are likely to include multiple enhancers,
dominant regulatory elements such as LCRs,
and boundary elements, which all act together
to protect the transgene from position effects.
Dominantly acting transgenes
(transgene rescue)
Some conventional transgenes, including
b-globin and a-fetoprotein (Chada et al.
1986, Kollias et al. 1986, Hammer et al. 1987)
are very sensitive to position effects and de
novo silencing. Other genes appear to be less
sensitive to these phenomena, e.g.
immunoglobulin and elastase (Storb et al.
1984, Swift et al. 1984, Davis & MacDonald
1988). Although the reason for this is not
clear, the less sensitive transgenes are assumed
to in some way induce or define an open
chromatin domain. In some cases, such
sequences have been used to protect more
susceptible transgenes from negative position
effects by introducing the two transgenes
simultaneously (e.g. see Clark et al. 1992).
Site-specific integration
Site-specific recombination systems
(see Chapter 15) can be used to introduce
transgenes into a locus known to lack
negative position effects, if a target site for the
recombinase can be introduced at such a
locus. The Cre-loxP system has been used to
this effect in mammalian cells (see Fukushige
& Sauer 1992).

262

CHAPTER 13

Yeast artificial chromosome (YAC)
transgenic mice
Studies of the MMT promoter and others have
demonstrated the principle that transgenes with
minimal flanking sequences tend not to be expressed
in the same manner as the corresponding endogenous gene. In many cases, it has also been shown
that authentic patterns and levels of protein expression occur only when the intact gene is used, and
this can span tens or hundreds of kilobase pairs of
DNA (Box 13.2). The transfer of large DNA segments
to the mouse genome has been achieved by transformation with yeast artificial chromosome (YAC)
vectors. Jakobovits et al. (1993) were the first to
report transformation of ES cells with a YAC vector,
via fusion with yeast spheroplasts. The vector contained the entire human HPRT locus, nearly 700 kb
in length. The disadvantage of this method is that the
endogenous yeast chromosomes were co-introduced
with the vector. Alternative strategies involve isolation of the vector DNA by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (p. 17), followed by introduction of the
purified YAC DNA into mouse eggs by pronuclear
microinjection or transfection into ES cells. The latter
technique is more suitable because microinjection
involves shear forces that break the DNA into fragments. YAC transfer to ES cells has been achieved by
lipofection, as discussed in Chapter 12. YAC transgenics have been used to study gene regulation, particularly by long-range regulatory elements, such as
locus-control regions (reviewed by Lamb & Gerhart
1995). They have also been used to introduce the
entire human immunoglobulin locus into mice, for the
production of fully humanized antibodies (Mendez
et al. 1997). It is also possible to introduce chromosomes and chromosome fragments into ES cells using
a technique called microcell-mediated fusion. This
involves the prolonged mitotic arrest of cultured
human cells, using an inhibitor such as colchicine.
Eventually, the nucleus breaks up into vesicles containing individual chromosomes, which can be
rescued as microcells comprising a nuclear vesicle
surrounded by a small amount of cytoplasm and
a plasma membrane (Fournier & Ruddle 1977).
Transgenic mice have been generated using ES cells
that were fused to human microcells, and evidence
for germline transmission and expression of the
human chromosome was obtained (Tomizuka et al.
1997).

Applications of gene targeting
Since the first reports of gene targeting in ES cells,
an ever-increasing number of targeted mutant mice
have been produced. These have been discussed
in several comprehensive reviews (Brandon et al.
1995a,b,c, Soriano 1995, Muller 1999) and a number of Internet databases have been established to
keep track of the results (see Sikorski & Peters 1997).
The phenotypes of homozygous, null mutant mice
provide important clues to the normal function of
the gene. Some gene knockouts have resulted in
surprisingly little phenotypic effect, much less severe
than might have been expected. For example, myoD,
whose expression in transfected fibroblasts causes
them to differentiate into muscle cells, and which
was therefore a good candidate as a key regulator
of myogenesis, is not necessary for development of a
viable animal (Rudnicki et al. 1992). Similarly, the
retinoic acid γ receptor is not necessary for viable
mouse development in knockout mice (Lohnes et al.
1993), even though this receptor is a necessary component of the pathway for signaling by retinoids and
has a pattern of expression quite distinct from other
retinoic acid receptors in embryos. Such observations
have prompted speculation that genetic redundancy
may be common in development, and may include
compensatory up-regulation of some members of
a gene family when one member is inactivated. An
example of this is the up-regulation of myf-5 in mice
lacking myoD (Rudnicki et al. 1992). Gene knockouts have also been used as mouse models of human
diseases such as cystic fibrosis, β-thalassemia, and
fragile X syndrome (reviewed by Bedell et al. 1997;
see Chapter 26).
While most gene-targeting experiments in mice
have been used to introduce mutations into genes
(either disruptive insertional mutations or subtle
changes), the scope of the technique is much wider.
The early gene-targeting experiments demonstrated
that this approach could also be used to correct
mutated genes, with obvious applications in gene
therapy. Homologous recombination has also been
used to exchange the coding region of one gene
for that of another, a strategy described as “gene
knock-in”. This has been used, for example, to test
the ability of the transcription factors Engrailed-1
and Engrailed-2 to compensate for each other’s functions. Hanks et al. (1995) replaced the coding region
of the engrailed-1 gene with that of engrailed-2, and
showed that the engrailed-1 mutant phenotype could
be rescued. A more applied use of gene knock-in is

Genetic manipulation of animals

the replacement of parts of the murine immunoglobulin genes with their human counterparts, resulting
in the production of humanized antibodies in transgenic mice (Moore et al. 1995a). The Cre-loxP sitespecific recombinase system has been used extensively
in ES cells to generate mice in which conditional or
inducible gene targeting is possible and to produce
defined chromosome deletions and trans-locations
as models for human disease. We shall discuss the
many applications of Cre-loxP and other site-specific
recombinase systems in Chapter 15.

Standard transgenesis methods are
more difficult to apply in other mammals
and birds
The three major routes for producing transgenic
mice have also been used in other mammals and
birds, particularly in farm animals. The efficiency of
each procedure is much lower than in mice. Pronuclear microinjection in mammals such as sheep
and cows, for example, typically results in less than
1% of the injected eggs giving rise to transgenic animals. Added to this, the recovery of eggs from donor
animals and the reimplantation of transformed eggs
into foster mothers is a less efficient procedure and
requires, at great expense, a large number of donors
and recipients. The eggs themselves are also more
difficult to manipulate – they are very delicate and
tend to be opaque. It is often necessary to centrifuge
the eggs in order to see the pronuclei. In chickens, it
is possible to remove eggs just after fertilization and
microinject DNA into the cytoplasm of the germinal
disc, where the male and female pronuclei are to
be found. However, it is not possible to return the
manipulated eggs to a surrogate mother, so they
must be cultured in vitro. Using this procedure, Love
et al. (1994) obtained seven chicks, equivalent to
about 5% of the eggs injected, that survived to sexual
maturity. One cockerel transmitted the transgene to
a small proportion of his offspring, indicating that he
was mosaic for transgene integration.
The use of retroviruses to produce transgenic
chickens has been reported by Bosselman et al.
(1989). These investigators injected a replicationdefective recombinant reticuloendotheliosis virus
carrying the neo gene into laid eggs and found that
approximately 8% of male birds carried vector
sequences. The transgene was transmitted through
the germline in a proportion of these birds and was
stably expressed in 20 transgenic lines. As discussed

263

in Chapter 12, oncoretroviral vectors can only infect
dividing cells because they can only gain entry to the
nucleus when the nuclear membrane breaks down.
Since the nuclear envelope breaks down during
meiosis as well as mitosis, Chan et al. (1998) were
able to produce transgenic cattle following the injection of replication-defective retroviral vectors into
the perivitelline space of isolated bovine oocytes.
Retroviral integration occurred during the second
meiotic division, resulting in the production of a
number of transgenic offspring. The same technique
was later used to generate the first ever transgenic
primate, a rhesus monkey named ANDi2 (Chan et al.
2001), but the technique was very inefficient: 224
oocytes were injected to produce one live transgenic
monkey; a number of further transgenic fetuses
failed to develop to term. As well as their reliance
on nuclear division, oncoretroviral vectors are also
subject to de novo silencing and consequent loss of
transgene expression. These problems have been
addressed more recently through the development
of lentivirus vectors, which can infect non-dividing
cells (p. 245). Such vectors have been used to produce transgenic mice, rats, cattle, and pigs (Louis
et al. 2002, Pfeifer et al. 2002, Hoffman et al. 2003,
2004; reviewed by Pfeifer 2004).
After nearly two decades of research, it has also
proved impossible to derive reliable ES cell lines from
any domestic mammal other than mice (although
chicken ES cells have been isolated, and have been
used to develop transgenic strategies for birds; Pain
et al. 1999, Prelle et al. 1999). As an alternative
target, some researchers have sought to isolate
primordial germ cells (PGCs), the embryonic cells
that give rise to gametes. These can be transfected
directly, or cultured as embryonic germ (EG) cells,
which are morphologically very similar to ES cells
and could provide a route for the direct transformation of the germline (Resnick et al. 1992). Chicken
PGCs have been isolated from the germinal crescent,
infected with a recombinant retrovirus and replaced
in the embryo, leading to the development of chimeric
birds producing transgenic offspring (Vick et al.
1993). PGCs from mice, rabbits, cattle, and pigs have
also been isolated and transformed, although it has
been difficult to persuade the cells to contribute to
the germline once introduced into the host animal
(Brinster 2002). A similar technique has been developed more recently, in which male PGCs are allowed
2

The name comes from the phrase inserted DNA written
backwards.

264

CHAPTER 13

to mature into spermatogonia (the immature sperm
cells) prior to transfection. These cells can be reintroduced into the testis, where they give rise to
transgenic sperm. This method has been used successfully to produce transgenic mice and pigs (Kim
et al. 1997, Honaramooz et al. 2003).

Nuclear transfer technology can be used
to clone animals

fate as development proceeds, the nuclei of most cells
still retain all the genetic information required for
the entire developmental program and can, under
appropriate circumstances, be reprogrammed by the
cytoplasm of the egg to recapitulate development. In
all species, it appears that the earlier the developmental stage at which nuclei are isolated, the greater
their potential to be reprogrammed. Nuclear transplantation can be used to generate clones of animals
with the same genotype by transplanting many
somatic nuclei from the same individual into a
series of enucleated eggs (King & Briggs 1956). This
allows animals with specific and desirable traits to be
propagated. If possible in mammals, this would have
obvious applications in farming.
Nuclear transfer in mammals has been practiced
with success for the last decade, although rabbits
and farm animals, such as sheep, pigs, and cows, are
far more amenable to the process than mice. In each
case, donor nuclei were obtained from the morula or
blastocyst-stage embryo and transferred to an egg or
oocyte from which the nucleus had been removed
with a pipette (Smith & Wilmut 1989, Willadsen
1989, Collas & Robl 1990, McLaughlin et al. 1990).
The donor nucleus can be introduced by promoting
fusion between the egg and a somatic cell. A brief
electric pulse is often used to achieve this, as it also
activates embryonic development by stimulating the
mobilization of calcium ions.
A major advance was made in 1995, when two
live lambs, Megan and Morag (Fig. 13.7), were produced by nuclear transfer from cultured embryonic
cells (Campbell et al. 1996). This demonstrated the
principle that mammalian nuclear transfer was possible using a cultured cell line. The same group later
reported the birth of Dolly (Fig. 13.8), following nuclear

The failure of traditional transgenesis techniques to
yield routine procedures for the genetic modification
of mammals other than mice has driven researchers
in search of other methods. Over fifty years ago,
Briggs & King (1952) established the principle of
nuclear transfer in amphibians by transplanting
nuclei from the blastula of the frog Rana pipens to an
enucleated egg, obtaining a number of normal
embryos in the process. In Xenopus laevis, nuclei from
various types of cell in the swimming tadpole can be
transplanted to an egg that has been UV-irradiated
to destroy the peripheral chromosomes, and similar
results are obtained (reviewed by Gurdon 1986,
1991). The important principle here is that, while
animal cells become irreversibly committed to their

Fig. 13.7 Megan and Morag, the first sheep produced by
nuclear transfer from cultured cells. Reproduced by kind
permission of the Roslin Institute, Edinburgh.

Intracytoplasmic sperm injection uses sperm
as passive carriers of recombinant DNA
The injection of sperm heads directly into the cytoplasm of the egg (intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(ICSI)) can overcome infertility in humans. It has
been shown that sperm heads bind spontaneously to
naked plasmid DNA in vitro, suggesting that sperm
injections could be used to achieve transformation.
This was demonstrated by Perry et al. (1999), who
mixed mouse sperm with plasmid DNA carrying
the gene for green fluorescent protein (GFP). These
sperm were injected into unfertilized oocytes, and a
remarkable 94% of the resulting embryos showed
GFP activity. Random transfer of these embryos to
pseudopregnant females resulted in development
to term, and in about 20% of cases the mice were
transgenic. This method could be adaptable to other
animals. Rhesus monkey oocytes fertilized in the
same manner gave rise to a number of embryos with
GFP activity, but this only lasted until the blastula
stage, suggesting that there was no stable integration.
However, several monkeys developed to term, showing that the procedure was compatible with normal
development (Chan et al. 2000).

Genetic manipulation of animals

Fig. 13.8 Dolly and her lamb Bonnie. Dolly was the first
mammal to be generated by nuclear transfer from an
adult cell. Reproduced by kind permission of the Roslin
Institute, Edinburgh.

transfer from an adult mammary epithelial cell line
(Wilmut et al. 1997). This was the first mammal to
be produced by nuclear transfer from a differentiated
adult cell, and aroused much debate among both
scientists and the public concerning the possibility of human cloning (see Johnson 1998). It was
suggested that a critical factor in the success of
the experiment was the quiescent state of the cells
in culture, allowing synchronization between the
donor and recipient cell cycles (reviewed by Wilmut
et al. 2002). For the production of Dolly, this was
achieved by lowering the level of serum in the culture medium, causing the cells to withdraw from the
cell cycle due to lack of growth factors. However, the
success rate was very low: only one of 250 transfer
experiments produced a viable lamb, a phenomenon
that has been blamed on a lack of fundamental understanding of the nuclear reprogramming events that
occur following transplantation (Shi et al. 2003).
Similar transfer experiments have since been carried
out in mice, cows, pigs, goats, cats, dogs, rabbits,
mules, and rats using variations on the transfer
methodology developed by Wilmut and colleagues
(Cibelli et al. 1998, Wakayama et al. 1998, Baguisi
et al. 1999, Polejaeva et al. 2000, Shin et al. 2002,
Chesne et al. 2002, Galli et al. 2003, Woods et al.
2003, Zhou et al. 2003, Lee et al. 2005; see reviews
by Denning & Priddle 2003, Edwards et al. 2003).
Despite major efforts, there has been no success thus
far in the production of a cloned primate although

265

various individuals, nations, and religious sects have
put forward as yet unsubstantiated claims to have
produced the first cloned human being. There are
also several ongoing projects looking at the feasibility
of cloning rare animals or animals in captivity
representing species that are extinct in the wild. For
example, a cloned guar (a rare and endangered type
of ox native to Asia) was born to a surrogate cow in
2001, although it died the same day from an infection.
The success of nuclear transfer in domestic mammals provides a new route for the production of
transgenic animals. This involves the introduction
of DNA into cultured cells, which are then used as a
source of donor nuclei for nuclear transfer. Such a
cell-based strategy has many advantages over traditional techniques, such as microinjection, including
the ability to screen transformed cells for high-level
transgene expression prior to the nuclear-transfer
step. The production of a transgenic mammal by
nuclear transfer from a transfected cell line was first
achieved by Schnieke et al. (1997), who introduced
the gene for human factor IX into fetal sheep fibroblasts and transferred the nuclei to enucleated eggs.
The resulting sheep, Polly, produces the recombinant protein in her milk and can therefore be used as
a bioreactor (Chapter 26). McCreath et al. (2000)
succeeded in producing a transgenic sheep by
nuclear transfer from a somatic cell whose genome
had been specifically modified by gene targeting. A
foreign gene was introduced into the COL1A1 locus
and was expressed at high levels in the lamb.
Nuclear transfer was also used to produce the first
“gene knockout” mammals other than mice: Denning
et al. (2001) produced cloned lambs with targeted
disruptions of either the PRP gene, which encodes
the prion protein, or the GGTA1 gene, which encodes
an enzyme that adds carbohydrate groups to proteins that provoke the human immune system, one
of the most significant obstacles to xenotransplantation, the transplantation of organs from animals
such as monkey, sheep and pigs to human recipients. In 2002, two groups independently reported
targeted disruption of the GGTA1 gene in pigs, whose
organs are similar in size to their human counterparts and are envisaged as the most likely source for
xenotransplants (Dai et al. 2002, Lai et al. 2002). In
each of these reports only one allele of the autosomal
target gene was disrupted. The first homozygous
GGTA1 knockout pigs were produced by Phelps et al.
(2003) using heterozygous cells derived from the
earlier cloned pigs (Lai et al. 2002). The aim of the
experiment was to disrupt the second GGTA1 allele

266

CHAPTER 13

by gene targeting and then select cells lacking the
gal-epitope using a fungal toxin. However, on further analysis it was established that the second allele
had been produced by a spontaneous point mutation
within the GGTA1 gene, so in the strict sense the pigs
were still heterozygous, although for two null alleles.

Gene transfer to Xenopus can result in
transient expression or germline
transformation
Xenopus oocytes can be used as a
heterologous expression system
Gurdon et al. (1971) first showed that Xenopus
oocytes synthesized large amounts of globin after
they had been microinjected with rabbit globin
mRNA. Since then, the Xenopus oocyte expression
system has been a valuable tool for expressing a very
wide range of proteins from plants and animals
(Colman 1984). X. laevis is an African clawed frog.
Oocytes can be obtained in large numbers by
removal of the ovary of an adult female. Each fully
grown oocyte is a large cell (0.8–1.2 mm diameter)
arrested at first meiotic prophase. This large cell has
a correspondingly large nucleus (called the germinal
vesicle), which is located in the darkly pigmented
hemisphere of the oocyte.
Due to the large size of the oocytes, mRNA – either
natural or synthesized by transcription in vitro, using
phage-T7 RNA polymerase (Melton 1987) – can be
readily introduced into the cytoplasm or nucleus
by microinjection. This is achieved using a finely
drawn glass capillary as the injection needle, held
in a simple micromanipulator. DNA can also be
injected. The oocyte nucleus contains a store of the
three eukaryotic RNA polymerases, enough to furnish the needs of the developing embryo at least
until the 60,000-cell stage. The RNA polymerases
are available for the transcription of injected exogenous DNA. Using this system, it has therefore been
possible to express complementary DNAs (cDNAs)
linked to a heat-shock promoter or to mammalian
virus promoters (Ballivet et al. 1988, Ymer et al.
1989, Swick et al. 1992). In addition, vaccinia virus
vectors (Chapter 12) can be used for gene expression
in the cytoplasm (Yang et al. 1991).
An important aspect of the oocyte expression
system is that recombinant proteins are usually
correctly post-translationally modified and directed
to the correct cellular compartment. For example,

oocytes translate a wide variety of mRNAs encoding secretory proteins, modify them, and correctly
secrete them (Lane et al. 1980, Colman et al. 1981).
Foreign plasma-membrane proteins are generally
targeted to the plasma membrane of the oocyte,
where they can be shown to be functional. The first
plasma-membrane protein to be expressed in this
system was the acetylcholine receptor from the electric organ of the ray, Torpedo marmorata (Sumikawa
et al. 1981). Injected oocytes translated mRNA
extracted from the electric organ and assembled
functional multi-subunit receptor molecules in the
plasma membrane (Barnard et al. 1982). Following
this work, the oocyte has become a standard heterologous expression system for plasma-membrane
proteins, including ion channels, carriers, and receptors. The variety of successfully expressed plasmamembrane proteins is very impressive. However,
there are examples of foreign channels and receptors
being non-functional in oocytes, either due to lack of
coupling to second-messenger systems in the oocyte,
incorrect post-translational modification, or other
reasons (reviewed in Goldin 1991).
Xenopus oocytes can be used for functional
expression cloning
Functional expression cloning using oocytes was
first developed by Noma et al. (1986), using a strategy outlined in Fig. 13.9. The following example, the
cloning of the substance-K receptor, is illustrative.
It has been found that oocytes can be made responsive to the mammalian tachykinin neuropeptide,

Tissue

Size
fractionation

Extraction
Affinity chromatography
Poly(A)+RNA
Microinjection

Poly(A)+RNA

Microinjection

Xenopus
oocyte

Assay for
functional
expression

Synthesis

cDNA library

In vitro transcription
and capping

Fig. 13.9 Strategy for functional expression cloning, using
Xenopus oocytes as a heterologous expression system.

Genetic manipulation of animals

substance K, by injecting an mRNA preparation from
bovine stomach into the oocyte cytoplasm. The preparation contains mRNA encoding the substance-K
receptor protein, which is evidently expressed as a
functional protein and inserted into the oocyte membrane. Masu et al. (1987) exploited this property to
isolate a cDNA clone encoding the receptor. The
principle was to make a cDNA library from stomach
mRNA, using a vector in which the cDNA was
flanked by a promoter for the SP6 or T7 RNA polymerase. This allowed in vitro synthesis of mRNA
from the mixture of cloned cDNAs in the library.
The receptor clone was identified by testing for
receptor expression following injection of synthetic
mRNA into the oocyte cytoplasm. Repeated subdivision of the mixture of cDNAs in the library led
to the isolation of a single cloned cDNA. The strategy
described above can only be applied to cloning
single-subunit proteins, not proteins composed of
different subunits or proteins whose function in
oocytes requires more than one foreign polypeptide.
This limitation was overcome by Lubbert et al.
(1987), who used a hybrid depletion procedure to
clone a serotonin-receptor cDNA.
A prerequisite for using the oocyte in functional
expression cloning is a knowledge of the oocyte’s
own ion channels, carriers, and receptors. Endogenous activity may mask or interfere with the soughtafter function (for a review, see Goldin 1991).
Transient gene expression in Xenopus embryos
is achieved by DNA or mRNA injection
Messenger RNA, synthesized and capped in vitro,
can be microinjected into dejellied Xenopus embryos
at the one- or two-cell stage. The mRNA is distributed
among the descendants of the injected cells and is
expressed during early development. This approach
has been exploited very widely for examining the
developmental effects resulting from the overexpression of normal or altered gene products (reviewed by
Vize & Melton 1991).
DNA can be introduced into Xenopus embryos
in the same manner. However, unlike the situation
in mammals, where the injected DNA integrates
rapidly into the genome, exogenous DNA in Xenopus
persists episomally and undergoes extensive replication (Endean & Smithies 1989). Bendig & Williams
(1983) provide a typical example of this process. They
injected a recombinant plasmid carrying Xenopus
globin genes into the egg and showed that the amount
of plasmid DNA increased 50- to 100-fold by the

267

gastrula stage. In later development, the amount of
DNA per embryo decreased, and most of the persisting DNA co-migrated with high-molecular-weight
chromosomal DNA. This difference between mammals and amphibians probably reflects their distinct
modes of early development. In mammals, cleavage
divisions are slow and asynchronous. Gene expression occurs throughout early development and
supplies the embryo with the proteins it requires at
a steady rate. Conversely, there is no transcription
in the early Xenopus embryo and yet the cleavage
divisions are rapid and synchronous. DNA replication relies on stored maternal gene products, so there
is a stockpile of chromatin assembly proteins and
replication enzymes. Exogenous DNA injected into
Xenopus eggs is therefore assembled immediately
into chromatin and undergoes replication in tune
with the rapid DNA synthesis already occurring in
the nucleus (Leno & Laskey 1991). Etkin et al. (1987)
have analyzed the replication of a variety of DNAs
injected into Xenopus embryos. It was found that
various plasmids increase to different extents. This
was not simply related to the size of the plasmid, but
also reflected the presence of specific sequences that
inhibited replication. Replication has also been found
to depend upon the conformation and number of
molecules injected (Marini et al. 1989).
Transgenic Xenopus embryos can be produced
by restriction enzyme-mediated integration
DNA injected into early Xenopus embryos is expressed
in a mosaic fashion during development, regardless
of the promoter used, which limits the use of this
system for the analysis of gene expression and function. Some of the DNA does become incorporated
into the genome and may be transmitted through
the germline (Rusconi & Schaffner 1981). However,
integration occurs at a very low frequency and,
given the long generation interval of Xenopus laevis
(12–18 months from egg to adult), this is not an
efficient way to generate transgenic frogs.
A simple and efficient process for large-scale
transgenesis in Xenopus has become available only
in the last 10 years (Kroll & Amaya 1996). In this
technique, known as restriction-enzyme-mediated
integration (REMI), linearized plasmids containing
the transgene of interest are mixed with decondensed
sperm nuclei and treated with limiting amounts of
a restriction enzyme to introduce nicks in the DNA.
The nuclei are then transplanted into unfertilized
Xenopus eggs, where the DNA is repaired, resulting

268

CHAPTER 13

in the integration of plasmid DNA into the genome.
This technique allows the production of up to 700
transgenic embryos per person per day, most of which
survive at least to the swimming-tadpole stage. The
decondensed nuclei are extremely fragile, so careful
handling and transplantation within about 30 min
are required for a good yield of normal transgenic
embryos. In some cases, viable transgenic adults
have been derived from the tadpoles and transgenic
X. laevis lines have been established (Bronchain et al.
1999, Marsh-Armstrong et al. 1999). A disadvantage of X. laevis is that the species is tetraploid. Offield
et al. (2000) have therefore established transgenic
lines of the closely related but diploid species Xenopus
tropicalis, which also has a shorter generation interval than its tetraploid cousin.
Since Xenopus is used worldwide as a developmental model organism, transgenic Xenopus technology
has been rapidly adopted in many laboratories and is
being used to examine (or in many cases re-examine)
the roles of developmental genes. Thus far, the
sophisticated tools used in transgenic mice have not
been applied to Xenopus, but this is only a matter of
time. Recently, an inducible expression system based
on the use of a Xenopus heat-shock promoter was
described, allowing inducible control of the GFP gene.
This system has been used to investigate Wnt signaling in early Xenopus development (Wheeler et al.
2000). As discussed above, one of the early successes
in transgenic mouse methodology was the expression of rat growth hormone, resulting in transgenic
mice up to twice the size of their non-transgenic
siblings. The role of growth hormone in amphibian
metamorphosis has now been examined by expressing Xenopus growth hormone in transgenic frogs. The
transgenic tadpoles developed at the same rate as
control tadpoles, but typically grew to twice the
normal size (Huang & Brown 2000). After metamorphosis, the transgenic frogs also grew much more
quickly than controls and showed skeletal defects.

Gene transfer to fish is generally carried out
by microinjection, but other methods are
emerging
Fish transgenesis can be used to study gene function
and regulation, e.g. in model species, such as the
zebrafish (Danio rerio) and medaka (Oryzias latipes),
and to improve the traits of commercially important
species, such as salmon and trout. Gene-transfer
technology in fish has lagged behind that in

mammals, predominantly due to the lack of suitable
regulatory elements to control transgene expression.
The first transgenic fish carried transgenes driven
by mammalian or viral regulatory elements, and
their performance varied considerably. For example,
attempts to express growth-hormone genes in trout
initially met with little success, and this may have
been due to the inability of fish cells to process mammalian introns correctly (Betancourt et al. 1993).
However, fish are advantageous assay systems for
several reasons, including their fecundity, the fact
that fertilization and development are external, and
the ease with which haploid and uniparental diploid
embryos can be produced (Ihssen et al. 1990).
Like frogs, the injection of DNA into fish eggs
and early embryos leads to extensive replication and
expression from unintegrated transgenes, so that
fish, like frogs, can be used for transient expression
assays (Vielkind 1992). Some of the DNA integrates
into the genome, leading to germline transmission
and the production of transgenic fish lines (reviewed
by Iyengar et al. 1996, Zbikowska 2003). There has
been recent progress in the development of novel
methods to enhance DNA integration in fish, based
on the use of purified enzymes from integrating DNA
elements (i.e. transposons and retroviruses). The
successful transfer of exogenous genes to zebrafish
embryos using retroviral vectors was followed by
the development of a hybrid technique in which
DNA was injected into zebrafish embryos along
with purified retroviral integrase, resulting in earlier
transgene integration and a significant increase in
integration efficiency. This prompted a search for
natural fish enzymes that could perform the same
function, but unfortunately all the fish transposons
that were isolated contained deletions or other
mutations that destroyed enzyme activity. This
problem was addressed by collecting the sequences
of many fish transposons and deriving a theoretical
ideal sequence, resulting in a synthetic transposon
system known as Sleeping Beauty. The use of Sleeping
Beauty as a gene-transfer vector in zebrafish increases
the efficiency of transgene integration over 20-fold,
and could well be suitable for other species of fish
(Zbikowska 2003). More recently, methods such as
electroporation and particle bombardment have also
been utilized with success for fish transgenesis, as well
as sperm-mediated gene transfer. A novel technique
applied in some species is the electroporation of sperm
with plasmid DNA followed by sperm-mediated DNA
transfer, a procedure which is analogous in some ways
to the REMI technique described for amphibians.

Genetic manipulation of animals

Gene transfer to fruit flies involves the
microinjection of DNA into the pole plasma
P elements are used to introduce DNA into
the Drosophila germline
P elements are transposable DNA elements that,
under certain circumstances, can be highly mobile
in the germline of D. melanogaster. The subjugation
of these sequences as specialized vector molecules in
Drosophila was a landmark in Drosophila genetics.
Through the use of P-element vectors, any DNA sequence can be introduced into the genome of the fly.
P elements cause a syndrome of related genetic
phenomena called P-M hybrid dysgenesis (Bingham
et al. 1982, Rubin et al. 1982). Dysgenesis occurs
when males of a P (paternally contributing) strain
are mated with females of an M (maternally contributing) strain, but not when the reciprocal cross
is made. The syndrome predominantly affects the
germline and induces a high rate of mutation and
frequent chromosomal aberrations, resulting in
abnormal (dysgenic) hybrid offspring. In extreme
cases, there is failure to produce any gametes at all.
Hybrid dysgenesis occurs because P strains contain transposable genetic elements, P elements, which
are mobilized in the eggs of M-strain females (eggs
that are permissive for P-element transposition are
described as M-cytotype). The P elements do not
cause dysgenesis in crosses within P strains, because
they are not mobilized in P-cytotype eggs. This is
because the P element encodes a repressor of its own
transposase, which prevents transposition. When a
sperm from a P-cytotype male fertilizes the egg of an
M-cytotype female, the absence of repressor in the
egg results in temporary derepression of the transposase, such that P-element transposition occurs at
a high frequency. The high rate of mutation characteristic of the dysgenesis syndrome reflects the insertion of P elements into multiple genetic loci.
Several members of the P-element family have
been cloned and characterized (O’Hare & Rubin
1983). The prototype is a 2.9-kb element, while
other members of the family appear to have arisen
by internal deletion events. The elements are characterized by perfect 31-bp inverted terminal repeats,
which are recognized by the transposase. The prototype element contains a single gene, comprising
four exons, encoding the transposase (a truncated
version of the transposase may act as the repressor).
The transposase primary transcript is differentially
spliced in germ cells and somatic cells, such that

269

functional transposase is produced only in germ
cells. Laski et al. (1986) showed this clearly by
making a P-element construct in which the differentially spliced third intron was precisely removed.
This element showed a high level of somatic transposition activity. Naturally occurring short P elements
are generally defective, because they do not encode
functional transposase. However, they do possess
the inverted terminal repeats and can be activated in
trans by transposase supplied by a non-defective P
element in the same nucleus.
Spradling & Rubin (1982) devised an approach
for introducing P-element DNA into Drosophila
chromosomes. Essentially, a recombinant plasmid
comprising a 2.9-kb P element together with some
flanking Drosophila DNA sequences, cloned in the
pBR322 vector, was microinjected into the posterior
pole of M-cytotype embryos. The embryos were injected
at the syncytial blastoderm stage, when the cytoplasm
has not yet become partitioned into individual cells
(Fig. 13.10). The posterior pole was chosen because
this is where the germline originates, and P-element
DNA in this region was expected to be incorporated
into the genome in a proportion of the germ cells.
A screen of progeny lines showed that P elements
had indeed integrated at a variety of sites in each of
the five major chromosomal arms, as revealed by
in situ hybridization to polytene chromosomes.
P-element integration occurred by transposition,
not by random integration. This was proved by probing Southern blots of restricted DNA and showing
that the integrated P element was not accompanied
by the flanking Drosophila or pBR322 DNA sequences
present in the recombinant plasmid (Spradling &
Rubin 1982). The injected plasmid DNA must therefore have been expressed at some level before integration, so as to provide transposase.
These experiments showed that P elements could
transpose with a high efficiency from injected plasmids into diverse sites in the chromosomes of germ
cells. At least one of the integrated P elements in
each progeny line remained functional, as evidenced
by the hypermutability it caused in subsequent crosses
to M-cytotype eggs.
Natural P elements have been developed into
vectors for gene transfer
Rubin & Spradling (1982) exploited their finding
that P elements can be artificially introduced into
the Drosophila genome. A possible strategy for using
the P element as a vector would be to attempt

270

CHAPTER 13

Plasma membrane

Female pronucleus
Male pronucleus

Chorion
(protective
coat)

Micropyle
(through which
sperm enters)

Fertilized egg

Germ plasm
Posterior
end

DNA injected

Anterior
end

9 synchronous nuclear divisions

Diploid cleavage nuclei

Syncytial
blastoderm
About 12 nuclei migrate to
the posterior pole where they
form germline precursor cells
or pole cells

Pole cells
(germline
precursors)

Blastoderm cell

Individual
blastoderm
cells formed

Fig. 13.10 Early embryogenesis of Drosophila. DNA injected
at the posterior end of the embryo just prior to pole-cell
formation is incorporated into germline cells.

to identify a suitable site in the 2.9-kb P-element
sequence where insertion of foreign DNA could be
made without disrupting sequences essential for
transposition. However, an alternative strategy was
favored. A recombinant plasmid was isolated which
comprised a short (1.2 kb), internally deleted member of the P-element family together with flanking
Drosophila sequences, cloned in pBR322. This naturally defective P element did not encode transposase
(O’Hare & Rubin 1983). Target DNA was ligated into
the defective P element. The aim was to integrate this
recombinant P element into the germline of injected
embryos by providing transposase function in trans.
Two approaches for doing this were initially tested.
In one approach a plasmid carrying the recombinant
P element was injected into embryos derived from a

P-M dysgenic cross, in which transposase activity
was therefore expected to be high. A disadvantage
of this approach was that frequent mutations and
chromosomal aberrations would also be expected.
In the other approach, the plasmid carrying the
recombinant P element was co-injected with a
plasmid carrying the non-defective 2.9-kb element.
In the first experiments of this kind, embryos homozygous for the rosy mutation were microinjected
with a P-element vector containing a wild-type rosy
gene. Both methods for providing complementing
transposase were effective. Rosy+ progeny, recognized by their wild-type eye color, were obtained
from 20–50% of injected embryos. The chromosomes of these flies contained one or two copies of the
integrated rosy transgene. The rosy gene is a particularly useful genetic marker. It produces a clearly visible phenotype: Rosy− flies have brown eyes instead
of the characteristic red color of Rosy+ flies. The rosy
gene encodes the enzyme xanthine dehydrogenase,
which is involved in the production of a precursor of
eye pigments. The rosy gene is not cell-autonomous:
expression of rosy anywhere in the fly, for example in
a genetically mosaic fly developing from an injected
larva, results in a wild-type eye color. Selectable
markers have been used instead of visible markers to
identify transformed flies. These include the alcohol
dehydrogenase gene adh (Goldberg et al. 1983) and
neo (Steller & Pirrotta 1985). Other eye-color markers have been used, including white and vermilion
(Ashburner 1989, Fridell & Searles 1991), as well as
alternative visible markers, such as rough (which
restores normal eye morphology) and yellow (which
restores normal body pigmentation and is particularly useful for scoring larvae) (Locket et al. 1992,
Patton et al. 1992).
A simple P-element vector is shown in Fig. 13.11
(Rubin & Spradling 1983). It consists of a P element
cloned in the bacterial vector pUC8. Most of the
P element has been replaced by the rosy gene, but
the terminal repeats essential for transposition have
been retained. The vector includes a polylinker site
for inserting foreign sequences. Transposition of the
recombinant vector into the genome of injected
larvae is brought about by co-injecting a helper P
element, which provides transposase in trans but
which cannot transpose itself because of a deletion
in one of its terminal inverted repeats. Such an element is referred to as a wings-clipped element (Karess
& Rubin 1984). An alternative strategy is to inject
purified transposase protein (Kaufman & Rio 1991).
The capacity of P-element vectors is large, although

271

Genetic manipulation of animals

Structure of P-element derivative: Carnegie 20
Insert DNA as required
Polylinker

IR

31 bp inverted repeat (IR)

7.2 kb rosy fragment

pUC8 vector

Lacks own transposase gene

Structure of helper P-element: pπ 25.7 wings clipped
23 bp of IR deleted
therefore cannot be transposed
0

Fig. 13.11 P-element
derivatives as a vector
system. (See text for
details.)

1

2

3

IR

increasing the size of the recombinant element appears
to reduce the transposition frequency. Inserts of over
40 kb have been successfully introduced into flies
(Haenlin et al. 1985) and this has allowed the construction of cosmid libraries using P-element vectors
(Speek et al. 1988).
Gene targeting in Drosophila has been
achieved using a combination of homologous
and site-specific recombination
The transformation of flies is normally achieved by
the injection of P elements, borne on plasmid vectors,
into the pole plasm region of early embryos. The direct
injection of DNA does not result in gene targeting
even if the construct is homologous to an endogenous
gene, and this is because the P element functions
specifically as an integrating element. Although rare
targeting events have been recovered by selection in
a Drosophila somatic cell line, flies have no cell system
equivalent to ES cells for the production of transgenics.
To overcome this problem, gene targeting in
Drosophila is accomplished by generating the donor
molecule in vivo, which is achieved using a novel
combination of endonuclease digestion and sitespecific recombination (Rong 2002). Three P elements are required, initially introduced into three
different fly lines and then stacked by two generations of crossing. The first P element contains the
gene encoding the yeast site-specific recombinase
FLP, which excises DNA sequences between direct

Encodes transposase

repeats of the FRT site as a circular product. The
second P element contains the gene encoding the
rare-cutting endonuclease I-Sce1, which has a 22bp recognition site not found anywhere in the
wild-type Drosophila genome. Both genes are under
control of a heat-shock promoter. The final element
contains the sequence of the donor molecule, which
is homologous to the intended target site elsewhere
in the genome, together with an adjacent marker,
the white gene, which produces flies with the wildtype red eye color in a background of flies with white
eyes. The donor sequence is interrupted by the recognition site for I-Sce1, and the donor sequence and
marker are flanked by FRT sites (Fig. 13.12a). When
all three elements are present in the same fly line, the
flies are heat-shocked. The FLP enzyme then excises
the donor molecule as a circular element containing
a marker gene, homology region, and a single FRT
site. Simultaneously, the I-Sce1 enzyme cleaves the
donor molecule within the homology region, producing a linear construct analogous to the insertion
type element shown in Fig. 13.4. The donor sequence
can then align with its target and undergo homologous recombination, resulting in the targeted disruption of the endogenous gene (Figure 13.12b).
To recover targeting events, the heat-shocked flies
are mated to wild types. Most progeny of this cross
lack the marker gene because the FLP-excised donor
molecule is often lost. However, where targeting
has been successful, the marker will be present in
the offspring and will display the corresponding

272

CHAPTER 13

X

FLP

I Sce1

a

a

b

A

b

d
X

Target

Donor P element

e

c

A

‘Free’ donor

Fig. 13.12 Gene targeting in Drosophila. In this example, the target locus is on the X chromosome (X) and is identified by a purple
box (top left panel). Flies with three P elements are made by crossing independently transformed lines. In this example, the
elements containing the flp and I-sce1 transgenes are present on the same autosome (A) (top right panel) while the element
containing the donor sequence is present on another autosome (A) (bottom right panel). Expression of flp and I-sce1 transgenes
(a) results in the production of the corresponding enzymes which act on the donor construct (b) producing a linearized free donor
molecule (c). In the bottom left panel, this is shown synapsing with the target locus (d) and recombining to generate a duplicated
target gene (e) interrupted by the marker and one FRP site. Circle is FLP enzyme, arrow is FRP site, triangle is I-Sce1, purple bar is
I-Sce1 target site.

phenotype. Each stage of the targeting process can
be confirmed in different ways. Successful excision of
the donor sequence can be confirmed by FLP expression, since only the intact donor element has the
marker gene flanked by two FRT sites. However, the
marker will survive FLP-mediated excision through
random integration as well as homologous recombination. Therefore, genuine targeting events must be
confirmed by genetic linkage analysis and molecular
analysis, such as PCR or Southern blot hybridization.
As with gene targeting in mammals, the efficiency of
targeting in Drosophila is both locus dependent and
related to the length of the homology region. Unlike
the situation in mammals, however, there are only a
maximum of two donor molecules in the cell (if the
cell is in G2) rather than the hundreds or thousands
introduced into mammalian cells by transfection.
This suggests that in vivo donors are far more
efficient substrates for homologous recombination
than exogenously supplied DNA.
As is the case for gene targeting in mice, the
Drosophila targeting strategy leads to a duplication of
the homology region. However, because Drosophila
genes can be small compared to those in mammals,

providing enough homology to facilitate efficient
recombination may in some cases require the
entire gene to be present. Various schemes have been
devised to ensure mutation of the target locus where
the homology region encompasses the entire gene.
The one shown in Fig. 13.13 involves the creation

Marker

Double mutant

Target
HR

Fig. 13.13 Scheme for generating targeted mutants in
Drosophila. The targeting construct contains a point mutation
either side of the I-Sce1 recognition site, so that insertion
by homologous recombination generates two copies of
the target gene, each containing a different mutation.
Spontaneous intrachromosomal recombination to resolve
such duplications has not been observed in Drosophila,
although the presence of two mutations would prevent
reversion to wild type should such an event occur.

Genetic manipulation of animals

of two point mutations, one either side of the I-Sce1
site. This produces a tandem duplication of the entire
target gene separated by the marker, each copy harboring a different mutation.

Suggested reading
Brinster R.L. (2002) Germline stem cell transplantation
and transgenesis. Science 296, 2174–6.
Capecchi M.R. (1989) The new mouse genetics – altering
the genome by gene targeting. Trends in Genetics 5,
70–6.
Edwards J.L., Schrick F.N., McCracken M.D., van
Amstel S.R., Hopkins F.M., Welborn M.G. & Davies C.J.
(2003) Cloning adult farm animals: a review of the
possibilities and problems associated with somatic
cell nuclear transfer. American Journal of Reproduction
& Immunology 50, 113–23.
Moraes C.T., Dey R. & Barrientos A. (2001) Transmitochondrial technology in animal cells. Methods in
Cell Biology 65, 397–412.

273

Muller U. (1999) Ten years of gene targeting: targeted
mouse mutants, from vector design to phenotype
analysis. Mechanical Development 82, 3–21.
Palmiter R.D. & Brinster R.L. (1986) Germline transformation of mice. Annual Review of Genetics 20,
465–99.
Pfeifer A. (2004) Lentiviral transgenesis. Transgenic
Research 13, 513–22.
Rong Y.S. (2002) Gene targeting by homologous
recombination: a powerful addition to the genetic
arsenal for Drosophila geneticists. Biochem Biophys
Res Communication 297, 1–5.
Slack J.M.W. (1996) Developmental biology – high
hops of transgenic frogs. Nature 383, 765–6.
Twyman R.M. & Whitelaw C.A.B. (2000) Animal cell
genetic engineering. In Spier R.E. (ed.) Encyclopedia
of Cell Technology. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York,
pp. 737–819.
Zbikowska H.M. (2003) Fish can be first – advances
in fish transgenesis for commercial applications.
Transgenic Research 12, 379–89.

CHAPTER 14
Gene transfer to plants

Introduction
Plants provide human beings with all manner of
useful products: food and animal feed, fibers and
structural materials, and small molecules that can
be used as dyes, scents, and medicines. Plants have
been cultivated for these products since the dawn of
history, and for the same length of time people have
sought to improve plants by breeding them and selecting the better-performing and most useful varieties.
The one limitation of this approach is that breeders
are restricted to the existing gene pool in each species
or sexually compatible group of species. In order
to surmount this barrier, it has been necessary to
develop technologies for gene transfer to plants.
During the 1960s and 1970s several attempts
to transfer DNA into plant tissues were reported
but stable transformation was never confirmed
(e.g. Stroun et al. 1966, Coe and Straker 1966). The
introduction of foreign DNA into a plant followed
by stable transmission through the germline was
first demonstrated in 1981, when transgenic tobacco
plants were generated by transformation using
the soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Otten
et al. 1981). In the 25 years following this report,
foreign genes have been introduced into well over
100 different plant species either through the use of
A. tumefaciens or alternative strategies involving direct
DNA transfer to plant cells and tissues. In addition,
plant viruses have been developed as versatile
episomal vectors, allowing high-level transient gene
expression. This research has founded an agricultural biotechnology industry in which plants are
manipulated to make them resistant to pests and
diseases, to improve their tolerance of stress, to
improve their nutritional characteristics and even to
act as factories producing therapeutic proteins and
industrial enzymes (Chapter 26).
A fundamental difference between animals and
plants is that organized, differentiated plant tissue
shows a high degree of developmental plasticity.
Depending on the species, isolated stem segments,

leaf disks, or seed-derived callus tissue may be able
to regenerate an entire new plant under appropriate
culture conditions. For most plant species, some
form of tissue culture step is therefore necessary for
the successful production of transgenic plants. It
should be noted, however, that there is now increasing interest in the use of whole-plant (in planta)
transformation strategies, in which the need for tissue
culture is minimized or eliminated.

Plant tissue culture is required for most
transformation procedures
Callus cultures are established under
conditions that maintain cells in an
undifferentiated state
Tissue culture is the process whereby small pieces
of living tissue (explants) are isolated from an organism and grown aseptically for indefinite periods on a
nutrient medium. For successful plant tissue culture
it is best to start with an explant rich in undetermined cells because such cells are capable of rapid
proliferation. The usual explants are buds, root tips,
nodal stem segments or germinating seeds, and these
are placed on suitable culture media where they
grow into an undifferentiated mass known as a
callus (Fig. 14.1). Since the nutrient media used for
plants can also support the growth of microorganisms, the explant is first washed in a disinfectant
such as sodium hypochlorite or hydrogen peroxide.
Once established, the callus can be propagated
indefinitely by subdivision. Usually callus cultures
are maintained in the dark because light can induce
differentiation of callus cells.
For plant cells to develop into a callus it is essential
that the nutrient medium contains the correct balance
of plant hormones (phytohormones) to maintain
the cells in an undifferentiated state. There are five
main classes of plant hormones: auxins, cytokinins,
gibberellins, abscisic acid, and ethylene (Fig. 14.2).

275

Gene transfer to plants

O
CO
OH

HO

CH2

OCH3 COOH
Gibberellic acid (GA3) [a gibberellin]

CH3

Fig. 14.1

CH3

CH3

Close-up view of a callus culture.
OH

The correct balance of auxins and cytokinins is most
important for callus culture, and the exact relative
amounts need to be determined empirically for each
species and explant type. A low auxin:cytokinin ratio
leads to shoot formation whereas a high ratio favors
the formation of roots. Requirements for the other
hormones vary according to species and explant.
Some explants require the presence of gibberellins such
as GA3 for continued growth, whereas abscisic acid
tends to be used to encourage specific developmental
events, such as somatic embryogenesis. Ethylene is
rarely used in tissue culture, although sometimes
ethylene produced naturally by cultured cells can
inhibit cell growth. Most of the media in common
use consist of inorganic salts and trace metals (usually referred to respectively as macroelements and
microelements), essential vitamins (thiamine and
myoinositol), an organic nitrogen source (usually
one or more amino acids), and sucrose as a carbon
source. For more complex organic nutrients such as
casein hydrolysate, coconut water or yeast extract
may also be required. Many plant culture media also
include a gelling agent so that plants can grow on
the surface of the medium and project roots into the
gel as they would naturally into soil.

O

COOH

CH3
Abscisic acid (ABA)

CH2OH
H

CH2
N

C
CH3

CH
N

N

N

N

H
Zeatin [a cytokinin]

CH2COOH
N
H
Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) [an auxin]

Callus cultures can be broken up to form
cell suspensions, which can be maintained
in batches
H

Depending on the species and culture conditions,
callus tissue can become hard and compact or soft
and easily breakable. The latter is known as friable
callus, and when transferred into liquid medium and
agitated, the cell mass breaks up to give a suspension
of isolated cells, small clusters of cells, and larger
aggregates. Such suspensions can be maintained

H
C

C

H

H
Ethylene

Fig. 14.2 The structures of some chemicals that are plant
growth regulators, phytohormones.

276

CHAPTER 14

indefinitely by subculture but, by virtue of the presence of aggregates, are extremely heterogeneous.
Genetic instability adds to this heterogeneity, so that
long-term culture results in the accumulation of
mutations (somaclonal variation) which can adversely
affect the vitality and fertility of regenerated plants.
If placed in a suitable medium, isolated single cells
from suspension cultures are capable of division.
As with animal cells, conditioned medium may be
necessary for proliferation to occur. Conditioned
medium is prepared by culturing high densities of
cells in fresh medium for a few days and then removing the cells by filter sterilization. Medium conditioned
in this way contains essential amino acids and plant
hormones. Provided conditioned medium is used,
single cells can be plated onto solid media in exactly
the same way as microorganisms, but instead of
forming a colony, plant cells proliferate and form
a callus.
Protoplasts are usually derived suspension
cells and can be ideal transformation targets
Protoplasts are cells from which the cellulose walls
have been removed. They are very useful for genetic
manipulation for two reasons: first, several transformation protocols have been developed that work
specifically with protoplasts; and second, because
under certain conditions, protoplasts from similar or
contrasting cell types can be fused to yield somatic
hybrids, a process known as protoplast fusion. Protoplasts can be produced from suspension cultures,
callus tissue, or intact tissues, e.g. leaf mesophyll
cells, by mechanical disruption or, preferably, by
treatment with cellulolytic and pectinolytic enzymes.
Pectinase is necessary to break up cell aggregates
into individual cells and the cellulase digests away
the cell wall. After enzyme treatment, protoplast
suspensions are collected by centrifugation, washed
in medium without the enzyme, and separated from
intact cells and cell debris by flotation on a cushion
of sucrose (Fig. 14.3). When plated onto nutrient
medium, protoplasts will synthesize new cell walls
within 5–10 days and then initiate cell division.
Cultures can also be established directly from
the rapidly dividing cells of meristematic
tissues or embryos, or from haploid cells
Roots and shoots contain meristematic tissue, which
is the source of all dividing cells in the elongating
roots and stem. Root and shoot tips can be excised

Fig. 14.3

Photomicrograph of tobacco protoplasts.

and cultured directly on solid medium, and will give
rise to new organs that can be clonally propagated.
Similarly, embryos contain rapidly proliferating cells
which can be used as a source of callus. This is the
most widely applied strategy to regenerate cereals
and other monocotyledonous plants.
Another common source of callus tissue is the
male gametophyte, or microspore, which is found
in pollen grains. Anther culture is used to provide
an environment that stimulates the development
of embryos from these cells. During embryogenesis,
the haploid tissue may undergo spontaneous or
induced chromosome doubling, resulting in so-called
dihaploid plants containing two copies of the same
haploid genome.
Regeneration of fertile plants can occur
through organogenesis or somatic
embryogenesis
The developmental plasticity of plant cells means that
whole fertile plants can often be regenerated from
tissue explants, callus, cell suspensions, or protoplasts
by placing them on appropriate media. As discussed
above, the maintenance of cells in an undifferentiated
state requires the correct balance of phytohormones.
However, only cytokinin is required for shoot culture
and only auxin for root culture, therefore increasing
the level of cytokinins available to the callus induces
shoot formation and increasing the auxin level
promotes root formation. Ultimately plantlets arise

Gene transfer to plants

through the development of adventitious roots on
shoot buds, or through the development of shoot
buds from tissues formed by proliferation at the base
of rootlets. The formation of roots and shoots on
callus tissue is known as organogenesis. The culture
conditions required to achieve organogenesis vary
from species to species, and have not been determined for every type of callus. As discussed, the
adventitious organogenesis of shoots and roots can
also occur directly from organized plant tissues such
as stem segments, without first passing through a
callus stage.
Under certain conditions, cell suspensions or
callus tissue of some plant species can be induced
to undergo a different development process known
as somatic embryogenesis. In this process, the cells
undergo a pattern of differentiation similar to that seen
in zygotes after fertilization, to produce embryoids.
These structures are embryo-like but differ from
normal embryos in being produced from somatic
cells and not from the fusion of two germ cells.
The embryoids can develop into fertile plants without the need to induce root and shoot formation
on artificial media.
The ease with which plant material is manipulated and interconverted in culture provides many
opportunities for the development of techniques for
gene transfer and the recovery of transgenic plants
(Fig. 14.4). DNA can be introduced into most types of
plant material – protoplasts, cell suspensions, callus,
tissue explants, gametes, seeds, zygotes, embryos,
organs, and whole plants – so the ability to recover
fertile plants from such material is often the limiting step in plant genetic engineering rather than
the DNA transfer process itself. It is also possible
to maintain transformed plant cell lines or tissues
(e.g. root cultures) producing recombinant proteins or metabolites, in the same way that cultured
animal cells can be used as bioreactors for valuable
products.

There are four major strategies for gene
transfer to plant cells
As is the case for animal cells (Chapter 12), gene
transfer to plants can be achieved through four
types of mechanism – viral transduction, bacterial
gene delivery, and chemical and physical direct DNA
transfer. Unlike the situation in animals, where bacterial gene transfer is a relatively new development,
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is the most

277

widely used transformation method, particularly for
dicotyledonous plants. Physical methods are the
next most popular, especially particle bombardment
for the transformation of monocotyledonous plants
such as cereals. Chemical transfection methods are
little used, and are compatible only with protoplasts,
which behave in many ways analogously to animal
cells. Many of the techniques used to transfect animal
cells can therefore be applied to plant protoplasts,
e.g. calcium phosphate transfection. All three of
the above methods can be used for either transient
expression or stable transformation. Another major
difference between gene-transfer strategies in animal
and plant cells is that no known plant viruses integrate their genetic material into the plant genome as
part of the natural infection cycle. Therefore, plant
viruses are used as episomal vectors rather than for
stable transformation. However, while stable transformation cannot be achieved, plant viruses often
cause systemic infections resulting in the rapid
production of high levels of recombinant protein
throughout the plant, and they can be transmitted
through normal infection routes, or by grafting
infected scions onto virus-free hosts.

Agrobacterium-mediated transformation
Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a plant pathogen
that induces the formation of tumors
Gene transfer from bacteria to plants occurs naturally and is responsible for crown gall disease. This is
a plant tumor that can be induced in a wide variety
of gymnosperms and dicotyledonous angiosperms
(dicots) by inoculation of wound sites with the Gramnegative soil bacterium A. tumefaciens (Fig. 14.5). The
involvement of bacteria in this disease was established nearly 100 years ago by Smith & Townsend
(1907). It was subsequently shown that the crown
gall tissue represents true oncogenic transformation,
since the undifferentiated callus can be cultivated in
vitro even if the bacteria are killed with antibiotics,
and yet retains its tumorous properties (Fig. 14.6).
These properties include the ability to form a tumor
when grafted onto a healthy plant, the capacity for
unlimited growth as a callus in tissue culture even
in the absence of phytohormones necessary for the
in vitro growth of normal cells, and the synthesis
of opines, such as octopine and nopaline, which are
unusual amino acid derivatives not found in normal
plant tissue (Fig. 14.7).

278

CHAPTER 14

Zygotic
embryogenesis

Whole plant
Organogenesis
Seeds
Gametes

Agrobacterium tumefaciens

Explant

Organogenesis or
somatic embryogenesis

Callus

Cells

Protoplasts

The metabolism of opines is a central feature of
crown gall disease. Opine synthesis is a property
conferred upon the plant cell when it is colonized by
A. tumefaciens. The type of opine produced is determined not by the host plant but by the bacterial
strain. In general, the bacterium induces the synthesis of an opine that it can catabolize and use as
its sole carbon and nitrogen source. Thus, bacteria
that utilize octopine induce tumors that synthesize
octopine, and those that utilize nopaline induce
tumors that synthesize nopaline (Bomhoff et al.
1976, Montaya et al. 1977).

Fig. 14.4 Depending on species,
plant tissues are extremely pliable
and can be easily interconverted and
regenerated in culture. This diagram
shows some of the ways in which this
flexibility can be exploited to facilitate
gene transfer and the creation of
transgenic plants.

The ability to induce tumors is conferred
by a Ti-plasmid found only in virulent
Agrobacterium strains
Since the continued presence of Agrobacterium is
not required to maintain plant cells in their transformed state, it is clear that some “tumor-inducing
principle” is transferred from the bacterium to the
plant at the wound site. Zaenen et al. (1974) first
noted that virulent strains of A. tumefaciens harbor
large plasmids (140–235 kbp), and experiments
involving the transfer of such plasmids between

279

Gene transfer to plants

Wound infected with soil
bacterium A. tumefaciens

Crown gall

Excise tissue
from crown gall

Tissue continues to grow
as callus in culture in
absence of added
phytohormones

Carbenicillin in medium
kills Agrobacterium

Callus

Fig. 14.6 A. tumefaciens induces plant tumors, but is not
required for the continuous proliferation of those tumors.

Fig. 14.5 Crown gall on blackberry cane. (Photograph
courtesy of Dr. C.M.E. Garrett, East Malling Research Station.)
NH

H
R

CO2H

C
NH

CH3

C

CO2H

H
Octopine family

Octopine

R = NH2

Octopinic acid

R = NH2(CH2)3

Lysopine

R = NH2(CH2)4

Histopine

R=

N

NH

C

CO2H

NH
HO2C

(CH2)2C
H

Fig. 14.7 Structures
of some opines.

Nopaline family

NH

(CH2)3

NH

(CH2)3

CH2

NH

H
R

C

CO2H

Nopaline

R = NH2

C

Nopalinic acid

R = NH2(CH2)3

280

CHAPTER 14

T-DNA
Virulence
genes

T-DNA
Conjugative
transfer

Octopine
Ti-plasmid
pTiACH5

Virulence
genes

Octopine
catabolism
Agropine
catabolism

Nopaline
catabolism

Nopaline
Ti-plasmid
pTiC58

Agrocinopine
catabolism
Conjugative transfer

various octopine- and nopaline-utilizing strains soon
established that virulence and the ability to use and
induce the synthesis of opines are plasmid-borne
traits. These properties are lost when the bacteria are
cured of their resident plasmid (Van Larbeke et al.
1974, Watson et al. 1975) but acquired by avirulent
strains when a virulence plasmid is reintroduced
by conjugation (Bomhoff et al. 1976, Gordon et al.
1979). The plasmids therefore became known as
tumor-inducing plasmids (Ti-plasmids).
Ti-plasmids specify the type of opine that is synthesized in the transformed plant tissue and the opine
utilized by the bacterium. Plasmids in the octopine
group are closely related to each other while those in
the nopaline group are considerably more diverse.
Between the groups, there are four regions of
homology, including the genes directly responsible
for tumor formation (Drummond & Chilton 1978,
Engler et al. 1981; Fig. 14.8). It should be noted
that the presence of a plasmid in A. tumefaciens does
not mean that the strain is virulent. Many strains
contain very large cryptic plasmids that do not confer virulence, and in some natural isolates a cryptic
plasmid is present together with a Ti-plasmid.
A short segment of DNA, the T-DNA, is
transferred to the plant genome
Complete Ti-plasmid DNA is not found in plant
tumor cells but a small, specific segment of the plasmid, about 23 kbp in size, is found integrated in the
plant nuclear DNA at an apparently random site.
This DNA segment is called T-DNA (transferred DNA)
and carries genes that confer both unregulated
growth and the ability to synthesize opines upon the
transformed plant tissue. However, these genes are
non-essential for transfer and can be replaced with
foreign DNA (see below). The structure and organization of nopaline plasmid T-DNA sequences are
usually simple, i.e. there is a single integrated seg-

Fig. 14.8
maps.

Ti-plasmid gene

ment. Conversely, octopine T-DNA comprises two
segments, TL (which carries the genes required for
tumor formation) and TR (which carries the genes
for opine synthesis). The two segments are transferred to the plant genome independently and may
be present as multiple copies. The significance of
this additional complexity is not clear.
In the Ti-plasmid itself, the T-DNA is flanked
by 25-bp imperfect direct repeats known as border
sequences, which are conserved between octopine
and nopaline plasmids. The border sequences are
not transferred intact to the plant genome, but they
are involved in the transfer process. The analysis of
junction regions isolated from plant genomic DNA
has shown that the integrated T-DNA end points lie
internal to the border sequences. The right junction
is rather precise, but the left junction can vary by
about 100 nucleotides (Yadav et al. 1982, Zambryski
et al. 1982). Deletion of the right-border repeat
abolishes T-DNA transfer, but the left-hand border
surprisingly appears to be non-essential. Experiments
in which the right-border repeat alone has been used
have shown that an enhancer, sometimes called the
overdrive sequence, located external to the repeat is
also required for high-efficiency transfer (Shaw et al.
1984, Peralta et al. 1986). The left-border repeat has
little transfer activity alone ( Jen & Chilton 1986).
The genes responsible for T-DNA transfer are
located in a separate part of the Ti-plasmid called the
vir (virulence) region. Two of these genes, virA and
virG, are constitutively expressed at a low level and
control the plant-induced activation of the other vir
genes. VirA is a kinase that spans the inner bacterial
membrane, and acts as the receptor for certain phenolic molecules that are released by wounded plant
cells. A large number of such compounds has been
characterized, but one in particular, acetosyringone,
has been the most widely used in the laboratory
to induce vir gene expression (Stachel et al. 1985;
Fig. 14.9). Notably, phenolic compounds such as

Gene transfer to plants

CH3

O
C

CH3O

C

OCH3
OH

Acetosyringone

CH2OH

O

CH3O

OCH3
OH

α-hydroxyacetosyringone

Fig. 14.9 Structures of signal molecules, produced by
wounded plant tissue, which activate T-DNA transfer by
A. tumefaciens.

acetosyringone do not attract bacteria to wounded
plant cells. Rather, the bacteria appear to respond
to simple molecules such as sugars and amino acids,
and the vir genes are induced after attachment (Parke
et al. 1987, Loake et al. 1988). Many sugars also synergize the action of the phenolic signals to enhance
vir gene expression (Shimada et al. 1990). Activated
VirA transphosphorylates the VirG protein, which
is a transcriptional activator of the other vir genes.
The VirA and VirG proteins show similarities to
other two-component regulatory systems common
in bacteria (Winans 1992). In addition to virG, further genes on the bacterial chromosome also encode
transcription factors that regulate vir gene expression
(reviewed by Kado 1998, Gelvin 2000, 2003).
The induction of vir gene expression results in
the synthesis of proteins that form a conjugative
pilus through which the T-DNA is transferred to the
plant cell. The components of the pilus are encoded
by genes in the virB operon (reviewed by Lai & Kado
2000). DNA transfer itself is initiated by an endonuclease formed by the products of the virD1 and virD2
genes. This introduces either single-strand nicks or
a double-strand break at the 25-bp borders of the
T-DNA, a process enhanced by the VirC12 and VirC2
proteins, which recognize and bind to the overdrive enhancer element. The VirD2 protein remains
covalently attached to the processed T-DNA. Recent
studies have suggested that the type of T-DNA
intermediate produced (single- or double-stranded)
depends on the type of Ti-plasmid, with doublestranded T-DNA favored by nopaline plasmids
(where the T-DNA is a single element) and single
“T-strands” favored by octopine and succinopine
plasmids, where the T-DNA is split into noncontiguous sections (Steck 1997). T-strands are coated with
VirE2, a single-stranded DNA binding protein. The
whole complex, sometimes dubbed the firecracker

281

complex because of its proposed shape, is then transferred through the pilus and into the plant cell.
The VirD2 protein has been proposed to protect the
T-DNA against nucleases, to target the DNA to the
plant cell nucleus, and to integrate it into the plant
genome. The protein has two distinct nuclear localization signals, with the C-terminal signal thought to
play the major role in targeting the T-DNA (Tinland
et al. 1992). It has been observed that the nucleus
of wounded plant cells often becomes associated
with the cytosolic membrane close to the wound site,
suggesting that the T-DNA could be transferred
directly to the nucleus without extensive exposure
to the cytosol (Kahl & Schell 1982). Once in the
nucleus, the T-DNA is thought to integrate through
a process of illegitimate recombination, perhaps
exploiting naturally occurring chromosome breaks
(Tinland 1996, Tzfira et al. 2004).
The Agrobacterium gene-transfer system appears
to be a highly adapted form of bacterial conjugation.
Many broad-host-range plasmids can transfer from
Agrobacterium to the plant genome using their own
mobilization functions (Buchanan-Wollaston et al.
1987) and the vir genes encode many components
that are common with broad-host-range plasmid
conjugation systems (reviewed by Kado 1998).
In addition to plants, Agrobacterium can transfer
DNA to other bacteria, yeast, and filamentous fungi.
Recently, a novel insight into the scope of this genetransfer mechanism was provided by Citovsky and
colleagues (Kunik et al. 2001) by demonstrating
that gene transfer from Agrobacterium to cultured
human cells was also possible! For the interested
reader, T-DNA transfer has been discussed in several
comprehensive reviews (Zupan et al. 2000, Tzfira
& Citofsky 2000, 2002, Gelvin 2003, Valentine
2003).
Disarmed Ti-plasmid derivatives can be used
as plant gene-transfer vectors
Genetic maps of T-DNA have been obtained by studying spontaneous and transposon-induced mutants
that affect tumor morphology, generating tumors
that are larger than normal, or that show “shooty”
or “rooty” phenotypes. Although normal tumors
can grow on medium lacking auxins and cytokinins,
the tumor cells actually contain high levels of these
hormones. Ooms et al. (1981) therefore proposed
that the oncogenes carried on the T-DNA encoded
products involved in phytohormone synthesis and
that the abnormal morphologies of T-DNA mutants

282

CHAPTER 14

Gene

Product

Function

ocs
nos
tms1 (iaaH, auxA)
tms2 (iaaM, auxB)
tmr (ipt, cyt)
tml

Octopine synthase
Nopaline synthase
Tryptophan-2-mono-oxygenase
Indoleacetamide hydrolase
Isopentyl transferase
Unknown

frs
mas
ags

Fructopine synthase
Mannopine synthase
Agropine synthase

Table 14.1
Functions of some
T-DNA genes in A.
tumefaciens Ti plasmids.

Opine synthesis
Opine synthesis
Auxin synthesis
Auxin synthesis
Cytokinin synthesis
Unknown, mutations
affect tumor size
Opine synthesis
Opine synthesis
Opine synthesis

Nopaline T-DNA (23 kb) pTiC58
R border

L border
5

2

1

tms

4 6a6b 3

tmr tml nos

Octopine TL-DNA (13.6 kb) pTiAch5
L border

R border

7
5

2

tms

1

TR-DNA
L border

R border

4 6a6b 3

4’ 3’ 2’

tmr tml ocs

frs

were due to a disturbance in the balance of plant
hormones in the callus. The cloning and functional
analysis of T-DNA genes has confirmed that those
with “shooty” mutant phenotypes encode enzymes
for auxin biosynthesis, and those with “rooty” phenotypes are involved in cytokinin production (Weiler &
Schroder 1987). Other genes have been identified as
encoding enzymes for opine synthesis, while the function of some genes remains unknown (Table 14.1).
The transcript maps of T-DNAs from a nopaline
plasmid (pTiC58) and an octopine plasmid (pTiAch5)
are shown in Fig. 14.10 (Willmitzer et al. 1982,
1983, Winter et al. 1984).
Interestingly, nucleotide sequencing has revealed
that the T-DNA genes have promoter elements
and polyadenylation sites that are eukaryotic in
nature (De Greve et al. 1982a,b, Depicker et al. 1982,
Bevan et al. 1983a,b). This explains how genes from
a bacterial plasmid come to be expressed when
transferred to the plant nucleus. It is possible that the
sequences may have been captured from plants
during the evolution of the Ti-plasmid. The ability

1’

0’

mas ags

Fig. 14.10 Structure and transcription
of T-DNA. The T-regions of nopaline and
octopine Ti-plasmids have been aligned
to indicate the common DNA sequences.
The size and orientation of each
transcript (numbered) is indicated by
arrows. Genetic loci, defined by deletion
and transposon mutagenesis, are shown
as follows: nos, nopaline synthase; ocs,
octopine synthase; tms, shooty tumor;
tmr, rooty tumor.

of Agrobacterium to induce tumors in a wide variety
of plants suggested that T-DNA promoters such as
those of the ocs (octopine synthase) and nos (nopaline synthase) genes could be useful for driving
transgene expression. These and other promoters
used for transgene expression in plants are discussed
in Box 14.1.
We have seen that the Ti-plasmid is a natural vector
for genetically engineering plant cells because it can
transfer its T-DNA from the bacterium to the plant
genome. However, wild-type Ti-plasmids are not
suitable as general gene vectors because the T-DNA
contains oncogenes that cause disorganized growth
of the recipient plant cells. To be able to regenerate
plants efficiently we must use vectors in which the
T-DNA has been disarmed by making it non-oncogenic.
This is most effectively achieved simply by deleting
all of its oncogenes. For example, Zambryski et al.
(1983) substituted pBR322 sequences for almost all
of the T-DNA of pTiC58 leaving only the left- and rightborder regions and the nos gene. The resulting construct was called pGV3850 (Fig. 14.11). Agrobacterium

Gene transfer to plants

283

Box 14.1 Control of transgene expression in plants
Promoters
To achieve high-level and constitutive
transgene expression in plants, a very active
promoter is required. In dicots, promoters
from the Agrobacterium nopaline synthase
(nos), octopine synthase (ocs), and mannopine
synthase (mas) genes have been widely used.
These are constitutive and also moderately
induced by wounding (An et al. 1990,
Langridge et al. 1989). The most popular
promoter for transgene expression in dicots
is the 35S RNA promoter from cauliflower
mosaic virus (CaMV 35S). This is very
active, but can be improved still further
by duplicating the enhancer region (Rathus
et al. 1993). These promoters have a much
lower activity in monocots, and duplicating
the CaMV 35S enhancer has little effect.
Alternative promoters have therefore been
sought for transgene expression in cereals
(reviewed by McElroy & Brettel 1994). The
rice actin-1 and maize ubiquitin-1 promoters
have been widely used for this purpose
(McElroy et al. 1995, Christensen & Quail
1996). As well as constitutive promoters, a
large number of promoters have been used
to direct transgene expression in particular
tissues. In monocots, promoters from seed
storage-protein genes, such as maize zein,
wheat glutenin, and rice glutelins, have been
used to target transgene expression to the
seeds, which is beneficial for the accumulation
of recombinant proteins (Wu et al. 1998;
reviewed by Bilan et al. 1999). Promoters
targeting transgene expression to green
tissue are also useful (e.g. Graham et al. 1997,
Datta et al. 1998). We discuss inducible
expression systems for animals and plants in
Chapter 15.
Other components of the expression
vector
As discussed for animal cells (Box 12.2), other
sequences in the expression vector also

influence transgene expression. Generally,
the presence of an intron in a plant expression
cassette increases the activity of the promoter
(Bilan et al. 1999). The insertion of a
heterologous intron enhances the activity
of the CaMV 35S promoter in monocots
(e.g. see Mascarenhas et al. 1990, Vain et al.
1996) and constructs containing the actin or
ubiquitin promoters generally include the
first intron of the gene (McElroy et al. 1991).
All transgenes must include a polyadenylation
site, which in most cases is derived from the
Agrobacterium nos gene or the CaMV 35S
RNA. Whereas in animals it is conventional
to remove untranslated regions from the
expression construct, a number of such
sequences in plants have been identified as
translational enhancers. For example, the
5′ leader sequence of the tobacco mosaic virus
RNA, known as the omega sequence, can
increase transgene expression up to 80-fold
(reviewed by Futterer & Hohn 1996, Gallie
1996). As in animals, the translational start
site should conform to Kozak’s consensus
(Kozak 1999; see Box 12.2 for details) and the
transgene should be codon-optimized for the
expression host. A good example of the latter
is the use of codon-optimized insecticidal
toxin genes from Bacillus thuringiensis for
expression in transgenic crops, leading to
dramatically increased expression levels
compared with the unmodified genes
(Koziel et al. 1996). Also, the inclusion of
targeting information in the expression
cassette may be beneficial for the
accumulation of recombinant proteins. For
example, recombinant antibodies expressed
in plants are much more stable if targeted to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), since this
provides a favorable molecular environment
for folding and assembly. Targeting is
achieved using an N-terminal signal sequence
to direct the ribosome to the ER and a
C-terminal tetrapeptide retrieval signal, KDEL,
which causes accumulation in the ER lumen
(Horvath et al. 2000).

284

CHAPTER 14

pBR322
L border
AmpR
nos

R border

pGV3850
(PTiC58 derivative)

vir genes

Fig. 14.11 Structure of the Ti-plasmid pGV3850, in which
the T-DNA has been disarmed.

carrying this plasmid transferred the modified
T-DNA to plant cells. As expected, no tumor cells
were produced, but the fact that transfer had taken
place was evident when the cells were screened for

nopaline production and found to be positive. Callus
tissue could be cultured from these nopaline-positive
cells if suitable phytohormones were provided, and
fertile adult plants were regenerated by hormone
induction of plantlets.
The creation of disarmed T-DNA was an important
step forward, but the absence of tumor formation
made it necessary to use an alternative method to
identify transformed plant cells. In the experiment
described above, opine production was exploited
as a screenable phenotype, and the ocs and nos
genes have been widely used as screenable markers
(reviewed by Dessaux & Petit 1994). However, there
are several drawbacks associated with this system,
particularly the necessity to carry out enzymatic
assays on all potential transformants. To provide
a more convenient way to identify transformed
plant cells, dominant selectable markers have been
inserted into the T-DNA so that transformed plant
cells can be selected on the basis of drug or herbicide
resistance. The use of selectable markers in plants
is discussed in more detail in Box 14.2.

Box 14.2 Selectable markers for plants
Until recently, almost all selectable markers
used in plants were dominant selectable
markers, providing resistance to either
antibiotics or herbicides (see table). Some
plants, particularly monocots, are naturally
tolerant of kanamycin, and this antibiotic
may also interfere with regeneration. In
these species, alternative systems, such as
hygromycin or phosphinothricin selection,
are preferred.
The introduction of markers such as nptII,
hpt, and dhfr into the T-DNA of disarmed
Ti plasmids provided the first convenient
methods to identify transformed plant
tissue, and hence opened the way for
Agrobacterium to be used as a general plant
transformation system. The marker and
experimental transgene can be cloned in
tandem on the same T-DNA. In such cases,
it is better for the selectable marker to be
placed adjacent to the left-border repeat,
since this is transferred to the plant last
(Sheng & Citovsky 1996). This strategy
reduces the likelihood of obtaining plants

under selection containing the marker
alone and not the transgene of interest
(see Hellens et al. 2000a). Alternatively,
cotransformation can be achieved using
Agrobacterium strains containing two plasmids
or by co-inoculating plants with different
Agrobacterium strains, each containing a
single plasmid. Although there is some
controversy surrounding the fate of
co-introduced T-DNA sequences, it appears
that nopaline-type plasmids favor the
co-integration of multiple T-DNAs at the
same locus, often in an inverted repeat
pattern, while octopine-type plasmids favor
independent integration sites, which can
segregate in progeny plants (Depicker et al.
1985, Jones et al. 1987, Jorgensen et al. 1987,
De Block & Debrouwer 1991). In direct
transformation methods, the selectable
marker can be included either on the same
vector as the experimental transgene or on a
separate vector, since cotransformation occurs
at a high frequency (Schocher et al. 1986,
Christou & Swain 1990).
continued

285

Gene transfer to plants

Box 14.2
Marker
Drug resistance markers
aad (preferred for chloroplast
transformation (see p. 290))
ble
dhfr
hpt
nptII and aphII
gat
Herbicide resistance markers
bar and pat
csr1-1
dhps (sul)
epsp

continued

Selection

Trimethoprim, streptomycin,
spectinomycin, sulfonamides
Bleomycin
Methotrexate
Hygromycin
Kanamycin, neomycin, G418
Gentamicin
Phosphinothricin (bialaphos,
glufosinate ammonium, Basta)
Chlorsulfuron
Sulfonamides (Asualam)
Glyphosate

Recently, public concern that antibioticand herbicide-resistance markers could pose
a threat to health or the environment has
prompted research into alternative innocuous
marker systems. One example is the E. coli
manA gene, which encodes mannose
phosphate isomerase and confers upon
transformed cells the ability to use mannose as
a sole carbon source (Negrotto et al. 2000).
Another is the A. tumefaciens ipt (isopentyl
transferase) gene, located on the T-DNA,
which induces cytokinin synthesis and can be
used to select plants on the basis of their ability
to produce shoots from callus on medium
lacking cytokinins (Kunkel et al. 1999).
Other strategies have also been explored,
such as eliminating markers by sexual
crossing (Komari et al. 1996), transposition
(Goldsbrough et al. 1993), or site-specific

Binary vectors separate the T-DNA and the
genes required for T-DNA transfer, allowing
transgenes to be cloned in small plasmids
Although disarmed derivatives of wild-type Tiplasmids can be used for plant transformation,
they are not particularly convenient as experimental gene vectors because their large size makes
them difficult to manipulate in vitro, and there are
no unique restriction sites in the T-DNA. Initially,

References

Svab et al. 1990a
Hille et al. 1986
Eichholtz et al. 1987
Van den Elzen et al. 1985
Pridmore 1987
Hayford et al. 1988
De Block et al. 1987
Haughn et al. 1988
Guerineau & Mullineaux 1989
Shah et al. 1986

recombination (Dale & Ow 1991, Russel et al.
1992, Zubko et al. 2000). We consider the use
of Cre-loxP for marker excision in transgenic
organisms in Chapter 15. To verify the
successful elimination of particular genes,
counterselectable markers are required (e.g.
see the discussion of Tk as a couterselectable
marker for gene targeting in mice, p. 257). In
plants, the A. tumefaciens T-DNA gene tms2
has been used as a negative marker. This
encodes indoleacetamide hydrolase, an
enzyme that converts naphthaleneacetamide
(NAM) into the potent auxin
naphthaleneacetic acid. In the presence of
exogenously applied NAM, transformed callus
is unable to produce shoots due to the excess
levels of auxin, therefore only callus lacking
the gene is able to regenerate into full
transgenic plants (Sundaresan et al. 1995).

this problem was addressed by the construction of
cointegrate vectors. T-DNA isolated from a parent
Ti-plasmid was subcloned in a conventional E. coli
plasmid vector for easy manipulation, producing
a so-called intermediate vector (Matzke & Chilton
1981). These vectors were incapable of replication
in A. tumefaciens, and also lacked conjugation functions. Transfer was achieved using a “triparental
mating” in which three bacterial strains were
mixed together: (a) an E. coli strain carrying a helper

286

CHAPTER 14

Intermediate vector transferred
into Agrobacterium by
conjugation. Unable to replicate
autonomously in Agrobacterium

Disarmed Ti-vector pGV3850
resident in Agrobacterium

neo

nos

KanR

pGV3850
AmpR

AmpR

pBR322 pBR322

vir genes

Foreign gene
inserted

Homologous recombination between DNA regions derived from pBR322
Cointegrate formation
Select for maintenance of
cointegrate by kanamycin
Foreign gene
neo

AmpR

KanR

nos
AmpR

vir genes

Cointegrate disarmed Ti-plasmid

plasmid able to mobilize the intermediate vector
in trans; (b) the E. coli strain carrying the recombinant intermediate vector; and (c) A. tumefaciens
carrying the Ti-plasmid. Conjugation between the
two E. coli strains transferred the helper plasmid
to the carrier of the intermediate vector, which was
in turn mobilized and transferred to the recipient
Agrobacterium. Homologous recombination between
the T-DNA sequences of the Ti-plasmid and intermediate vector then resulted in the formation of a
large cointegrate plasmid, from which the recombinant T-DNA was transferred to the plant genome
(Fig. 14.12). In the cointegrate vector system, maintenance of the recombinant T-DNA is dependent

Fig. 14.12
Production of
recombinant disarmed
Ti plasmid by
cointegrate formation.

on recombination, which is enhanced if there is
an extensive homology region shared by the two
plasmids, as in Ti-plasmid pGV3850, which carries
a segment of the pBR322 backbone in its T-DNA.
Although intermediate vectors have been widely
used, the large cointegrates are not necessary for
transformation. The vir genes of the Ti-plasmid function in trans and can act on any T-DNA sequence
present in the same cell. Therefore, the vir genes
and the disarmed T-DNA containing the transgene
can be supplied on separate plasmids, and this is the
principle of binary vector systems (Hoekma et al.
1983, Bevan 1984). The T-DNA can be subcloned
on a small E. coli plasmid for ease of manipulation.

287

Gene transfer to plants

Bsp HI (3031)
pSa-ORI

BglII (536)
HpaI (568)
Asp7181 (783)
ApaI (793)
XhoI (798)
Sal I (804)
ClaI (814)
EcoRV (827)
EcoRI (831)
Pst I (841)
SmaI (845)
BamHI (849)
SpeI (855)
XbaI (861)
NotI (868)
SacII (880)
SacI (889)

LB
nptI
lacZ

pGreenII 0000
3304 bp

Fig. 14.13 The small
and versatile binary
vector pGreen,
reproduced with
permission of Roger
Hellens and Phil
Mullineaux.

RB
Bsp HI (2070)

This plasmid, called mini-Ti or micro-Ti, can be introduced into an Agrobacterium strain carrying a
Ti-plasmid from which the T-DNA has been
removed. The vir functions are supplied in trans,
causing transfer of the recombinant T-DNA to the
plant genome. The T-DNA plasmid can be introduced into Agrobacterium by triparental matings, or
by a more simple transformation procedure such as
electroporation (Cangelosi et al. 1991).
Most contemporary Ti-plasmid transformation
systems are based on a binary principle, in which
the T-DNA is maintained on a shuttle vector with a
broad-host-range origin of replication such as RK2
(which functions in both A. tumefaciens and E. coli) or
separate origins for each species. An independently
replicating vector is advantageous because maintenance of the T-DNA is not reliant on recombination,
and the binary vector’s copy number is not determined by the Ti-plasmid, making the identification of
transformants much easier. All the conveniences of
bacterial cloning plasmids have been incorporated
into binary vectors, such as multiple unique restriction sites in the T-DNA region to facilitate subcloning,
the lacZ gene for blue-white screening (McBride &
Summerfelt 1990) and a λ cos site for preparing
cosmid libraries (Lazo et al. 1991, Ma et al. 1992). A
current binary vector, pGreen, is shown in Fig. 14.13
(Hellens et al. 2000b). This plasmid is less than 5 kbp
in size and has 18 unique restriction sites in the
T-DNA, because the T-DNA is entirely synthetic. It
has a lacZ gene for blue-white selection of recombinants, and a selectable marker that can be used both
in bacteria and in the transformed plants. The progressive reduction in size has been made possible
by removing essential genes required for replication

ColEI ori

Stu I (1292)
Bgl II (1345)

in Agrobacterium and transferring those genes to the
bacterium’s genome, or onto a helper plasmid. The
pGreen plasmid, for example, contains the Sa origin
of replication, which is much smaller than the more
traditional Ri and RK2 regions. Furthermore, an
essential replicase gene is housed on a second plasmid called pSoup resident within the bacterium. All
conjugation functions have also been removed, so
this plasmid can only be introduced into Agrobacterium
by transformation (Hellens et al. 2000b).
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation can
be achieved using a simple experimental
protocol in many dicots
Once the principle of selectable, disarmed T-DNA
vectors was established, there followed an explosion in the number of experiments involving DNA
transfer to plants. Variations on the simple general
protocol of Horsch et al. (1985) have been widely
used for dicot plants (Fig. 14.14). In the original
report, small disks (a few millimeters diameter)
were punched from leaves, surface-sterilized, and
inoculated in a medium containing A. tumefaciens
transformed with the recombinant disarmed T-DNA
(as cointegrate or binary vector). The foreign DNA
contained a chimeric neo gene conferring resistance
to the antibiotic kanamycin. The disks were cultured
for two days and transferred to medium containing kanamycin to select for the transferred neo gene,
and carbenicillin to kill the Agrobacterium. After 2–
4 weeks, developing shoots were excised from the
callus and transplanted to root-inducing medium.
Rooted plantlets were subsequently transplanted to
soil, about 4–7 weeks after the inoculation step.

288

CHAPTER 14

Surface-sterilize

Inoculation

Culture overnight
in liquid with
Agrobacterium to
infect cut edges of disk

Small disks
punched
from leaf

Blot disk
dry

Leaf disk

Feeder plate

Filter paper
Shoot-inducing solid
medium + kanamycin
+ carbenicillin
Culture for about
20 days

Shoot-inducing
solid medium
(high in cytokinin)
Culture for 2 days

A layer of feeder
cells, previously
grown in
suspension

Shoot
formation

Excise
shooted callus,
transfer to
root-inducing
medium

Root-inducing solid
medium (high in
auxin) + kanamycin +
carbenicillin

Transfer plantlets to
soil as soon as roots
appear 4–7 weeks
after inoculation

This method has the advantage of being simple
and relatively rapid. It is superior to previous methods in which transformed plants were regenerated
from protoplast-derived callus, the protoplasts having been transformed by co-cultivation with the
Agrobacterium (De Block et al. 1984, Horsch et al.
1984). Contemporary protocols for the Agrobacteriummediated transformation of many solanaceous plants
are variations on the theme of the leaf disk protocol,
although the optimal explant must be determined for
each species. Alternative procedures are required for
the transformation of monocots, as discussed below.
Monocots were initially recalcitrant to
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation,
but it is now possible to transform certain
varieties of many cereals using this method
Until the mid-1990s, most monocotyledonous plants
(monocots) were thought to be outside the host range
of Agrobacterium, prompting research into alternative transformation methods as discussed below.
During the 1980s, limited evidence accumulated

Fig. 14.14 Leaf-disk
transformation by
A. tumefaciens.

showing that some monocots might be susceptible
to Agrobacterium infection (see for example the discussion of agroinfection with maize streak virus
DNA on p. 294). However, in most cases there was
no convincing evidence for T-DNA integration into
the plant genome. In the laboratory, it proved possible to induce tumors in certain monocot species,
such as asparagus (Hernalsteens et al. 1984) and
yam (Schafer et al. 1987). In the latter case, an
important factor in the success of the experiment
was pre-treatment of the Agrobacterium suspension
with wound exudate from potato tubers. It has been
argued that Agrobacterium infection of monocots
is inefficient because wounded monocot tissues do
not produce phenolics such as acetosyringone at
sufficient levels to induce vir gene expression.
Eventually, however, researchers began to develop
modified culture conditions and transformation procedures that worked with at least some monocots.
Rice transformation was achieved in the early 1990s
but the selection system (based on the nptII marker
and selection with G418) interfered with regeneration, and only a small number of transgenic plants

Gene transfer to plants

was produced (Raineri et al. 1990, Chan et al. 1992,
1993). The use of an alternative marker conferring
resistance to hygromycin allowed the regeneration
of large numbers of transgenic japonica rice plants
(Hiei et al. 1994), and the same selection strategy has
been used to produce transgenic rice plants representing the other important subspecies, indica and
javanica (Rashid et al. 1996, Dong et al. 1996). More
recently, efficient Agrobacterium-mediated transformation has become possible for other important
cereals, including maize (Ishida et al. 1996), wheat
(Cheng et al. 1997), barley (Tingay et al. 1997), and
sugarcane (Arencibia et al. 1998).
The breakthrough in cereal transformation using
Agrobacterium reflected the recognition of a number
of key factors required for efficient infection and gene
transfer to monocots. The use of explants containing
a high proportion of actively dividing cells, such as
embryos or apical meristems, was found to increase
transformation efficiency greatly, probably because
DNA synthesis and cell division favor the integration
of exogenous DNA. In dicots, cell division is often
induced by wounding, whereas wound sites in
monocots tend to become lignified. This probably
explains why traditional procedures such as the leaf
disk method are inefficient in monocots. Hiei et al.
(1994) showed that the co-cultivation of Agrobacterium and rice embryos in the presence of 100 mM
acetosyringone was a critical factor for successful
transformation. Transformation efficiency is increased
further by the use of vectors with enhanced virulence functions. The modification of Agrobacterium
for increased virulence has been achieved by increasing the expression of virG (which in turn boosts the
expression of the other vir genes) and/or the expression of virE1, which is a major limiting factor in TDNA transfer (reviewed by Sheng & Citovsky 1996),
resulting in so-called supervirulent bacterial strains
such as AGL-1. Komari et al. (1996) used a different
strategy, in which a portion of the virulence region
from the Ti-plasmid of supervirulent strain A281
was transferred to the T-DNA-carrying plasmid to
generate a so-called superbinary vector. The advantage of the latter technique is that the superbinary
vector can be used in any Agrobacterium strain.
Binary vectors have been modified to transfer
large segments of DNA into the plant genome
A precise upper limit for T-DNA transfer has not
been established. It is greater than 50 kbp (HerreraEstrella et al. 1983a,b), but using standard vectors
it is difficult to transfer inserts larger than 30 kbp

289

routinely due to instability in the bacterial host. The
analysis of very large genes or the transfer of multiple
genes (such as those encoding sequentially acting
enzymes of a metabolic pathway) can now be achieved
thanks to the development of high-capacity binary
vectors based on the artificial chromosome type
vectors used in E. coli. The first to be described was
BIBAC2 (Hamilton 1997). This contains an F-plasmid
origin of replication and is modeled on the bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC, p. 79). The basic vector
transforms tobacco with high efficiency, but the efficiency of transformation drops substantially when
large inserts are used. This vector has been used to
introduce 150 kbp of human DNA flanked by T-DNA
borders into the tobacco genome, although virulence
helper plasmids supplying high levels of VirG and VirE
in trans were critical for successful DNA transfer
(Hamilton et al. 1996). An alternative vector carrying a P1 origin of replication and modeled on the P1
artificial chromosome (PAC, p. 79) was constructed
by Liu et al. (1999). This transformation-competent
bacterial artificial chromosome (TAC) vector was
used to introduce up to 80 kbp of genomic DNA into
Arabidopsis, and while there was some loss of efficiency
with the larger inserts, it was still possible to produce many transgenic plants. Both vectors contain a
kanamycin resistance marker for selection in bacteria
and hpt for hygromycin selection in transgenic plants.
For the reasons discussed in Box 14.2, the hpt marker
gene is placed adjacent to the right border T-DNA
repeat. Both vectors also contain the Ri origin for maintenance in Agrobacterium, and within the T-DNA
region, the sacB marker for negative selection in E. coli,
interrupted by a polylinker for cloning foreign DNA.
One of the most attractive uses of high-capacity
binary vectors is for the positional cloning of genes
identified by mutation. The ability to introduce
large segments of DNA into the plant genome effectively bridges the gap between genetic mapping and
sequencing, allowing the position of mutant genes to
be narrowed down by complementation. Genomic
libraries have been established for several plant
species in BIBAC2 and TAC vectors (Hamilton et al.
1999, Shibata & Lui 2000) and a number of novel
genes have been isolated (e.g. Sawa et al. 1999, Kubo
& Kakimoto 2001).
Agrobacterium rhizogenes is used to transform
plant roots and produce hairy-root cultures
Agrobacterium rhizogenes causes hairy-root disease
in plants, and this is induced by root-inducing (Ri)
plasmids that are analogous to the Ti-plasmids of

290

CHAPTER 14

A. tumefaciens. The Ri T-DNA includes genes homologous to the iaaM (tryptophan 2-monooxygenase)
and iaaH (indoleacetamide hydrolase) genes of A.
tumefaciens. Four other genes present in the Ri TDNA are named rol for root locus. Two of these, rolB
and rolC, encode P-glucosidases able to hydrolyze
indole- and cytokine-N-glucosides. A. rhizogenes therefore appears to alter plant physiology by releasing
free hormones from inactive or less active conjugated
forms (Estruch et al. 1991a,b).
Ri-plasmids are of interest from the point of view
of vector development because opine-producing root
tissue induced by Ri-plasmids in a variety of dicots
can be regenerated into whole plants by manipulation of phytohormones in the culture medium. Ri
T-DNA is transmitted sexually by these plants and
affects a variety of morphological and physiological
traits, but does not in general appear deleterious. The
Ri-plasmids therefore appear to be already equivalent
to disarmed Ti-plasmids (Tepfer 1984). Transformed
roots can also be maintained as hairy-root cultures,
which have the potential to produce certain valuable
secondary metabolites at higher levels than suspension cultures, and are much more genetically stable
(Hamil et al. 1987, Signs & Flores 1990). The major
limitation for the commercial use of hairy-root cultures is the difficulty involved in scale-up, since each
culture comprises a heterogeneous mass of interconnected tissue, with highly uneven distribution
(reviewed by Giri & Narassu 2000).
Many of the principles explained in the context of
disarmed Ti-plasmids are applicable to Ri-plasmids.
A cointegrate vector system has been developed
(Jensen et al. 1986) and applied to the study of nodulation in transgenic legumes. Van Sluys et al. (1987)
have exploited the fact that Agrobacterium containing both an Ri-plasmid and a disarmed Ti-plasmid
can frequently co-transfer both plasmids. The
Ri-plasmid induces hairy-root disease in recipient
Arabidopsis and carrot cells, serving as a transformation marker for the co-transferred recombinant
T-DNA, and allowing regeneration of intact plants.
No drug resistance marker on the T-DNA is necessary with this plasmid combination.

Direct DNA transfer to plants
Transgenic plants can be regenerated from
transformed protoplasts
Protoplast transformation has much in common
with the transfection of animal cells (Chapter 12).

The protoplasts must initially be persuaded to take
up DNA from their surroundings, after which the
DNA integrates stably into the genome in a proportion of these transfected cells. Gene transfer across
the protoplast membrane is promoted by a number
of chemicals, of which polyethylene glycol has become
the most widely used due to the availability of simple
transformation protocols (Negrutiu et al. 1987).
Alternatively, DNA uptake may be induced by electroporation (Shillito et al. 1985). As with animal
cells, the introduction of a selectable marker gene
along with the transgene of interest is required for
the identification of stable transformants. This can
be achieved using plasmid vectors carrying both the
marker and the transgene of interest, but the use of
separate vectors also results in a high frequency of
co-transformation (Schocher et al. 1986). Putative
transformants are transferred to selective medium,
where surviving protoplasts regenerate their cell
walls and commence cell division, producing a callus. Subsequent manipulation of the culture conditions then makes it possible to induce shoot and root
development, culminating in the recovery of fertile
transgenic plants. The major limitation of protoplast
transformation is not the gene-transfer process itself,
but the ability of the host species to regenerate from
protoplasts. A general observation is that dicots are
more amenable than monocots to this process. In
species where regeneration is possible, an advantage
of the technique is that protoplasts can be cryopreserved and retain their regenerative potential (DiMaio
& Shillito 1989).
The first transformation experiments concentrated
on species such as tobacco and petunia in which
protoplast-to-plant regeneration is well documented.
An early example is provided by Meyer et al. (1987),
who constructed a plasmid vector containing the nptII
marker gene, and a maize cDNA encoding the enzyme
dihydroquercetin 4-reductase, which is involved in
anthocyanin pigment biosynthesis. The transgene
was driven by the strong and constitutive CaMV 35S
promoter. Protoplasts of a mutant, white-colored
petunia strain were transformed with the recombinant plasmid by electroporation and then selected on
kanamycin-supplemented medium. After a few days,
surviving protoplasts had given rise to microcalli,
which could be induced to regenerate into whole plants.
The flowers produced by these plants were brick red
instead of white, showing that the maize cDNA had
integrated into the genome and was expressed.
After successful experiments using model dicots,
protoplast transformation was attempted in monocots,
for which no alternative gene-transfer system was

Gene transfer to plants

then available. In the first such experiments, involving wheat (Lorz et al. 2005) and the Italian ryegrass
Lolium multiflorum (Potrykus et al. 1985a,b), protoplast transformation was achieved and transgenic
callus obtained, but it was not possible to recover
transgenic plants. The inability of most monocots to
regenerate from protoplasts may reflect the loss of
competence to respond to tissue culture conditions
as the cells differentiate. In cereals and grasses,
this has been addressed to a certain extent by using
embryogenic suspension cultures as a source of protoplasts. Additionally, since many monocot species
are naturally tolerant to kanamycin, the nptII marker
used in the initial experiments was replaced with
alternative markers conferring resistance to hygromycin or phosphinothricin. With these modifications,
it has been possible to regenerate transgenic plants
representing certain varieties of rice and maize with
reasonable efficiency (Shimamoto et al. 1988, Datta
et al. 1990, Omirulleh et al. 1993). However, the
extended tissue culture step is unfavorable, often
resulting in sterility and other phenotypic abnormalities in the regenerated plants.
Protoplast transformation was also the first method
developed for gene transfer to the chloroplast genome
of higher plants (Golds et al. 1993, O’Neill et al.
1993). In this context, plastid mutations conferring
tolerance to antibiotics through alterations in ribosome
structure can be used as an alternative to bacterial
antibiotic resistance genes for the selection of plastid
transformants (Kavanagh et al. 1999).
Particle bombardment can be used to
transform a wide range of plant species
An alternative procedure for plant transformation was
introduced in 1987, involving the use of a modified
shotgun to accelerate small (1–4 µm) metal particles
into plant cells at a velocity sufficient to penetrate the
cell wall (~250 m/s). In the initial test system, intact
onion epidermis was bombarded with tungsten particles coated in tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) RNA.
Three days after bombardment, approximately 40%
of the onion cells that contained particles also showed
evidence of TMV replication (Sanford et al. 1987).
A plasmid containing the cat reporter gene driven
by the CaMV35S promoter was then tested to determine whether DNA could be delivered by the same
method. Analysis of the epidermal tissue three days
after bombardment revealed high levels of transient
CAT activity (Klein et al. 1987).
The stable transformation of explants from several
plant species was achieved soon after these initial

291

experiments. Early reports included the transformation of soybean (Christou et al. 1988), tobacco (Klein
et al. 1988a), and maize (Klein et al. 1988b). In each
case, the nptII gene was used as a selectable marker,
and transformation was confirmed by the survival of
callus tissue on kanamycin-supplemented medium.
The ability to stably transform plant cells by this
method offered the exciting possibility of generating
transgenic plants representing species that were, at
the time, intractable to other transformation procedures. In the first such report, transgenic soybean
plants were produced from meristem tissue isolated
from immature seeds (McCabe et al. 1988). In this
experiment, the screenable marker gene gusA was
introduced by particle bombardment and transgenic
plants were recovered in the absence of selection by
screening for GUS activity (Box 15.1). Other early
successes included cotton, papaya, maize, and tobacco
(Finer & McMullen 1991, Fitch et al. 1990, GordonKamm et al. 1990, Fromm et al. 1990, Tomes et al.
1990; reviewed by Twyman & Christou 2004).
Particle bombardment has also been pivotal in the
development of chloroplast transformation technology (see below).
There is no intrinsic limitation to the potential of
particle bombardment since DNA delivery is governed
entirely by physical parameters (Altpeter et al. 2005).
Many different types of plant material have been
used as transformation targets, including callus, cell
suspension cultures, and organized tissues such as
immature embryos, meristems, and leaves. The
number of species in which transgenic plants can be
produced using variants of particle bombardment
has therefore increased dramatically over the last 10
years. Notable successes include almost all of the
commercially important cereals, i.e. rice (Christou et
al. 1991), wheat (Vasil et al. 1992), oat (Somers et al.
1992, Torbert et al. 1995), sugarcane (Bower &
Birch 1992), and barley (Wan & Lemaux 1994, Hagio
et al. 1995). Several literature surveys have been
published documenting the range of species that
have been transformed using this method (Christou
1996, Luthra et al. 1997, Twyman & Christou 2004).
The original gunpowder-driven device has been
improved and modified resulting in greater control
over particle velocity and hence greater reproducibility of transformation conditions. An apparatus based
on electric discharge (McCabe & Christou 1993) has
been used for the development of variety-independent
gene-transfer methods for the more recalcitrant
cereals and legumes. Several instruments have been
developed where particle acceleration is controlled
by pressurized gas. These include a pneumatic

292

CHAPTER 14

apparatus (Iida et al. 1990), a “particle inflow gun”
using flowing helium (Takeuchi et al. 1992, Finer
et al. 1992) and a device utilizing compressed helium
(Sanford et al. 1991). Physical parameters such as
particle size and acceleration (which affect the depth
of penetration and the amount of tissue damage) as
well as the amount and conformation of the DNA used
to coat the particles, must be optimized for each species
and type of explant (Finer et al. 1999, Twyman &
Christou 2004). However, the nature of the transformation target is probably the most important
single variable in the success of gene transfer.
Other direct DNA transfer methods have been
developed for intact plant cells
There is a great diversity of approaches for gene transfer to animal cells and many of the same methods
have been attempted in plants. Electroporation has
been used to transform not only protoplasts (see
above) but also walled plant cells, either growing in
suspension or as part of intact tissues. In many cases,
the target cells have been wounded or pre-treated
with enzymes in order to facilitate gene transfer (e.g.
D’Halluin et al. 1992, Laursen et al. 1994). However,
immature rice, wheat, and maize embryos can be
transformed using electroporation without any form
of pre-treatment (Kloti et al. 1993, Xu & Li 1994,
Sorokin et al. 2000). Other transformation methods
also involve perforation of the cell, including the use
of silicon carbide whiskers (Thompson et al. 1995,
Nagatani et al. 1997), ultrasound (Zhang et al. 1991),
or a finely focused laser beam (Hoffman 1996). In
most of these cases, only transient expression of the
introduced DNA has been achieved, although transgenic maize plants have been recovered following
whisker-mediated transformation (Frame et al. 1994).
Finally, microinjection of DNA into plant cells can
yield transformed cells or even transgenic plants,
although as is the case for animal cells this method is
not suitable for large-scale transformation (Crossway
et al. 1986, Leduc et al. 1996, Holm et al. 2000).
Direct DNA transfer is also used for
chloroplast transformation
So far, we have considered DNA transfer to the
plant’s nuclear genome. However, the chloroplast is
also a useful target for genetic manipulation because
thousands of chloroplasts may be present in photosynthetic cells and this can result in levels of transgene expression up to 50 times higher than possible

using nuclear transformation. Furthermore, transgenes integrated into chloroplast DNA do not appear
to undergo silencing or suffer from position effects
that can influence the expression levels of transgenes in the nuclear DNA (see Boxes 13.2 and 15.2).
Chloroplast transformation also provides a natural
containment method for transgenic plants, since
the transgene cannot be transmitted through pollen
(reviewed by Maliga 1993).
The first reports of chloroplast transformation
were serendipitous, and the integration events were
found to be unstable. For example, an early experiment in which tobacco protoplasts were co-cultivated
with Agrobacterium resulted in the recovery of one
transgenic plant line in which the transgene was
transmitted maternally. Southern blot analysis of
chloroplast DNA showed directly that the foreign
DNA had become integrated into the chloroplast
genome (De Block et al. 1985). However, Agrobacterium
is not an optimal system for chloroplast transformation because the T-DNA complex is targeted to the
nucleus. Therefore, direct DNA transfer has been
explored as an alternative strategy. Stable chloroplast transformation was first achieved in the alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which has a single large
chloroplast occupying most of the volume of the cell
(Boynton et al. 1988). Particle bombardment was
used in this experiment. The principles established
using this simple organism were extended to tobacco,
allowing the recovery of stable transplastomic tobacco
plants (Svab et al. 1990b). These principles included
the use of vectors containing chloroplast homology regions, allowing targeted integration into the
chloroplast genome, and use of the selectable marker
gene aad (encoding aminoglycoside adenyltransferase) which confers resistance to streptomycin
and spectinomycin (Zoubenko et al. 1994). Efficient
chloroplast transformation has been achieved both
through particle bombardment (e.g. Staub & Maliga
1992a,b) and PEG mediated transformation (Golds
et al. 1993, Koop et al. 1996). The use of a combined
selectable-screenable marker (aad linked to the gene
for green fluorescent protein) allows the tracking
of transplastomic sectors of plant tissue prior to
chlorophyll synthesis, so that transformed plants
can be rapidly identified (Khan & Maliga 1999). It is
now possible to transform the chloroplast genome
and then eliminate selectable marker genes after
transgene integration (Corneille et al. 2001,
Iamtham & Day 2000, Klaus et al. 2004).
Among crop plants, tobacco (Svab et al. 1990a,b),
tomato (Ruf et al. 2001) and potato (Sidorov et al.

Gene transfer to plants

1999) chloroplasts have been transformed, as
well as rapeseed and other brassicas (Hou et al.
2003, Skarjinskaia et al. 2003). Most recently,
soybean plastid transformation has been achieved
(Dufourmantel et al. 2004). The major limitations in
transforming the chloroplasts of other crop species,
especially monocots, include a poor understanding
of gene expression in non-green plastids, genedelivery methods for proplastids, and tissue culture
conditions. Thus far, chloroplast transformation
by particle bombardment has been achieved only
in crops that allow direct organogenesis. Transplastomic plants have been developed with improvements in a number of key agronomic traits (Daniell
et al. 2004), and there have been many reports of
chloroplasts expressing pharmaceutical proteins
(summarized by Altpeter et al. 2005). These topics
are considered in more detail in Chapter 26.

Gene targeting in plants
As discussed earlier in the book, gene targeting is an
efficient procedure in bacteria, yeast, and certain
animal cells, enabling directed changes to be introduced into the genome by homologous recombination. In plants, homologous recombination is a very
inefficient process; only one plant species has been
shown to undergo efficient nuclear homologous
recombination and that is the moss Physcomitrella
patens. Among higher plants, low-level gene targeting has been achieved in certain dicots with frequencies ranging from 10−3 to 10−6 (Lee et al. 1990,
Ofringa et al. 1990, Miao & Lam 1995, Risseeuw
et al. 1995, 1997, Kempin et al. 1997, Reiss et al.
2000, Hanin et al. 2001) and a transgene has
been repaired by homologous recombination in
tobacco (Paszkowski et al. 1988). However, the most
promising results have been achieved using a
T-DNA-mediated gene-targeting strategy involving
a long homology region in combination with a
strong counterselectable marker in rice (Terada et al.
2002). Targeting frequencies of up to 1% have been
achieved using this system (reviewed by Iida &
Tarada 2004, Cotsaftis & Guiderdoni 2005).

In planta transformation minimizes or
eliminates the tissue culture steps usually
needed for the generation of transgenic plants
Until recently, gene transfer to plants involved the
use of cells or explants as transformation targets

293

and an obligatory tissue culture step was needed for
the regeneration of whole fertile plants. Experiments
using the model dicot Arabidopsis thaliana have led
the way in the development of so-called in planta
transformation techniques, where the need for tissue
culture is minimized or eliminated altogether. Such
methods involve the introduction of DNA, either by
Agrobacterium or direct transfer, into intact plants.
The procedure is carried out at an appropriate time
in the plant’s life cycle so that the DNA becomes
incorporated into cells that will contribute to the
germline, directly into the germ cells themselves
(often at around the time of fertilization), or into the
very early plant embryo. Generally, in planta transformation methods have a very low efficiency, so
the small size of Arabidopsis and its ability to produce over 10,000 seeds per plant is advantageous.
This limitation has so far prevented in planta
techniques from being widely adopted for other
plant species.
The first in planta transformation system involved
imbibing Arabidopsis seeds overnight in an Agrobacterium culture, followed by germination (Feldman &
Marks 1987). A large number of transgenic plants
containing T-DNA insertions were recovered but
in general this technique has a low reproducibility. A
more reliable method has been described by Bechtold
et al. (1993) in which the bacteria are vacuum
infiltrated into Arabidopsis flowers. An even simpler
technique called floral dip has become widely used
(Clough & Bent 1998). This involves simply dipping
Arabidopsis flowers into a bacterial suspension at the
time of fertilization. In both these methods, the transformed plants are chimeric, but give rise to a small
number of transgenic progeny (typically about 10
per plant). It has been established that T-DNA is
transferred into the ovule during the transformation
procedure (Bechtold et al. 2000, Ye et al. 1999,
Desfeux et al. 2000). There have been few successful applications of these methods in other plants,
although a small number of model species have been
transformed as well as radish (Quing et al. 2000,
Trieu et al. 2000, Curtis et al. 2001).
Similar approaches using direct DNA transfer
have been tried in other species, but germline transformation has not been reproducible. For example,
naked DNA has been injected into the floral tillers
of rye plants (De La Pena et al. 1987) and postfertilization cotton flowers (Zhou et al. 1983) resulting
in the recovery of some transgenic plants. Transgenic
tobacco has been produced following particle bombardment of pollen (Touraev et al. 1997).

294

CHAPTER 14

An alternative to the direct transformation of germline tissue is the introduction of DNA into meristems
in planta followed by the growth of transgenic shoots.
In Arabidopsis, this has been achieved simply by
severing apical shoots at their bases and inoculating
the cut tissue with Agrobacterium suspension (Chang
et al. 1994). Using this procedure, transgenic plants
were recovered from the transformed shoots at a
frequency of about 5%. In rice, explanted meristem
tissue has been transformed using Agrobacterium and
particle bombardment, resulting in the proliferation
of shoots that can be regenerated into transgenic
plants (Park et al. 1996). Such procedures require
only a limited amount of tissue culture.

Plant viruses can be used as episomal
expression vectors
As an alternative to stable transformation using
Agrobacterium or direct DNA transfer, plant viruses
can be employed as gene transfer and expression
vectors. There are several advantages to the use
of viruses. First, viruses are able to adsorb to and
introduce their nucleic acid into intact plant cells.
However, for many viruses, naked DNA or RNA is
also infectious, allowing recombinant vectors to
be introduced directly into plants by methods such
as leaf rubbing. Second, infected cells yield large
amounts of virus, so recombinant viral vectors have
the potential for high-level transgene expression.
Third, viral infections are often systemic. The virus
spreads throughout the plant allowing transgene
expression in all cells. Fourth, viral infections are
rapid, so large amounts of recombinant protein can
be produced in a few weeks. Finally, all known plant
viruses replicate episomally, therefore the transgenes
they carry are not subject to the position effects
that often influence the expression of integrated
transgenes (Box 13.2). Since plant viruses neither
integrate nor pass through the germline, plants
cannot be stably transformed by viral infection
and transgenic lines cannot be generated. However,
this limitation can also be advantageous in terms of
containment.
A complete copy of a viral genome can also be
introduced into isolated plant cells or whole plants
by Agrobacterium or direct DNA transfer. In this
manner, it is possible to generate transiently transformed cell lines or transgenic plants carrying an
integrated recombinant viral genome. In the case of
RNA viruses, transcription of an integrated cDNA

copy of the genome yields replication-competent
viral RNA, which is amplified episomally, facilitating high-level transgene expression. Transgenic
plants are persistently infected by the virus and
can produce large amounts of recombinant protein.
In the case of DNA viruses, Agrobacterium-mediated
transient or stable transformation with T-DNA
containing a partially duplicated viral genome can
lead to the “escape” of intact genomes, which then
replicate episomally. The latter process, known as
“agroinfection” or “agroinoculation” provides a very
sensitive assay for gene transfer. More recently, the
Agrobacterium-mediated delivery of viral genomes
has been enhanced through a process called magnifection, in which amplification of the vector occurs
in all infected leaves (Marrilonnet et al. 2005).
As well as their use for the expression of whole
foreign proteins, certain plant viruses have recently
been developed to present short peptides on their
surfaces, similar to the phage display technology
discussed on p. 147. Epitope-display systems based
on cowpea mosaic virus, alfalfa mosaic virus, potato
virus X, and tomato bushy stunt virus have been
developed as a potential source of vaccines, particularly against animal viruses (reviewed by Lomonossoff
& Hamilton 1999, Pogue et al. 2002, Yusibov &
Rabindran 2004, Khalsa et al. 2004, Twyman et al.
2005). These systems are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 26.
The first plant viral vectors were based on
DNA viruses because of their small and
simple genomes
The vast majority of plant viruses have RNA genomes.
However, the two groups of DNA viruses that are
known to infect plants – the caulimoviruses and
the geminiviruses – were the first to be developed as
vectors because of the ease with which their small,
DNA genomes could be manipulated in plasmid
vectors.
The type member of the caulimoviruses is cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV). The 8-kb dsDNA genome
of several isolates has been completely sequenced,
revealing an unusual structure characterized by
the presence of three discontinuities in the duplex.
A map of the CaMV genome is shown in Fig. 14.15.
There are eight tightly packed genes, expressed as
two major transcripts: the 35S RNA (which essentially represents the entire genome) and the 19S
RNA (which contains the coding region for gene VI).
As discussed earlier in the chapter, the promoter

Gene transfer to plants

Nonessential
3‘
5‘

3‘

VII
I

IR1
19S

1

Nonessential

–
II

VI
2

8024 bp

III

35S
5‘ IR2

3 β

+
IV

α
V

VIII

Fig. 14.15 Map of the cauliflower mosaic virus genome.
The eight coding regions are shown by the thick gray arrows,
and the different reading frames are indicated by the radial
positions of the boxes. The thin lines in the center indicate the
(plus and minus) DNA strands with the three discontinuities.
The major transcripts, 19S and 35S, are shown around the
outside.

and terminator sequences for both transcripts have
been utilized in plant expression vectors, and the 35S
promoter is particularly widely used (Box 14.1).
Only two of the genes in the CaMV genome are
non-essential for replication (gene II and gene VII),
and since CaMV has an icosahedral capsid, the size
of the genome cannot be increased greatly without
affecting the efficiency of packaging. The maximum
capacity of the CaMV capsid has been defined as
8.3 kb, and with the removal of all non-essential
genes, this represents a maximum insert size of less
than 1 kb (Daubert et al. 1983). This restriction in
the capacity for foreign DNA represents a major
limitation of CaMV vectors. Thus far it has been
possible to express a number of very small transgenes,
such as the 240-bp bacterial dhfr gene (Brisson et al.
1984), the 200-bp murine metallothionein cDNA
(Lefebvre et al. 1987) and a 500-bp human interferon cDNA (de Zoeten et al. 1989). In Chapter 12,
we describe how similar limitations were overcome
for SV40, a virus that infects primate cells, through
the development of replicon vectors and helper viruses
or complementary cell lines supplying essential
functions in trans. Unfortunately, such an approach
is not possible with CaMV due to the high level of
recombination that occurs, leading to rapid excision
of the foreign DNA (Gronenborn & Matzeit 1989).

295

Geminiviruses are characterized by their twin
(geminate) virions, comprising two partially fused
icosahedral capsids. The small single-stranded DNA
genome is circular, and in some species is divided into
two segments called DNA A and DNA B. Interest
in geminivirus vector development was stimulated
by the discovery that such viruses use a DNA replicative intermediate, suggesting they could be more
stable than CaMV, whose RNA-dependent replication cycle is rather error-prone (Stenger et al. 1991).
Of the three genera of geminiviruses, two have been
developed as vectors. The begomoviruses have predominantly bipartite genomes; they are transmitted
by the whitefly Bemisia tabaci and infect dicots.
Species that have been developed as vectors include
African cassava mosaic virus (ACMV) and tomato
golden mosaic virus (TGMV). The mastreviruses have
monopartite genomes; they are transmitted by leafhoppers and predominantly infect monocots. Species
that have been developed as vectors include maize
streak virus (MSV) and wheat dwarf virus (WDV).
An important additional distinction between these
genera is that mastreviruses are not mechanically
transmissible. MSV, for example, has never been
introduced successfully into plants as native or cloned
DNA. Grimsley et al. (1987) were able to overcome
this problem using Agrobacterium, and were the first
to demonstrate the principle of agroinfection. They
constructed a plasmid containing a tandem dimer
of the MSV genome. This dimer was inserted into
binary vector, and maize plants were infected with
A. tumefaciens containing the recombinant T-DNA.
Viral symptoms appeared within two weeks of inoculation. Agroinfection has been used to introduce
the genomes of a number of different viruses into
plants. It can be demonstrated that if the T-DNA contains partially or completely duplicated genomes,
single copies of the genome can escape and initiate
infections. This may be mediated by homologous
recombination or a replicative mechanism (Stenger
et al. 1991). The study of Grimsley et al. (1987) incidentally provided the first evidence that Agrobacterium
could transfer T-DNA to maize. Agroinfection is a very
sensitive assay for transfer to the plant cell because
of the amplification inherent in the virus infection
and the resulting visible symptoms.
A number of geminiviruses have been developed
as expression vectors because of the possibility of
achieving high-level recombinant protein expression as a function of viral replication (reviewed by
Stanley 1993, Timmermans et al. 1994, Palmer
& Rybicki 1997). A generally useful strategy is the

296

CHAPTER 14

replacement of the coat protein gene, since this is
not required for replication and the strong promoter
can be used to drive transgene expression. In the
case of begomoviruses, which have bipartite genomes,
the coat protein gene is located on DNA A along
with all the functions required for DNA replication.
Replicons based on DNA A are therefore capable of
autonomous replication in protoplasts (e.g. Townsend
et al. 1986). Geminivirus replicon vectors can facilitate the high-level transient expression of foreign
genes in protoplasts. There appears to be no intrinsic
limitation to the size of the insert, although larger
transgenes tend to reduce the replicon copy number
(e.g. Laufs et al. 1990, Matzeit et al. 1991). Generally,
it appears that mastrevirus replicons can achieve
a much higher copy number in protoplasts than
replicons based on begomoviruses. A WDV shuttle
vector capable of replicating in both E. coli and plants
was shown to achieve a copy number of greater
than 3 × 104 in protoplasts derived from cultured
maize endosperm cells (Timmermans et al. 1992),
whereas the typical copy number achieved by TGMV
replicons in tobacco protoplasts is less than 1000
(Kanevski et al. 1992). This may, however, reflect
differences in the respective host cells rather than
the intrinsic efficiencies of the vectors themselves.
Geminiviruses are also valuable as expression
vectors in whole plants. In the case of the mastreviruses, all viral genes appear to be essential for
systemic infection, so coat protein replacement
vectors cannot be used in this manner. In contrast,
the coat protein genes of ACMV and TGMV are nonessential for systemic infection, but they are required
for insect transmission (Briddon et al. 1990). Therefore, replicon vectors based on these viruses provide
an in planta contained transient expression system.
Note that viral movement functions are supplied by
DNA B, so systemic infections occur only if DNA B is
also present in the plant.
In an early study, Ward et al. (1988) replaced most
of the ACMV AV1 gene with the cat reporter gene.
In infected tobacco plants, high-level CAT activity
was detected for up to four weeks. Interestingly, they
found that deletion of the coat protein gene caused
a loss of infectivity in plants, but this was restored
upon replacement with cat, which is approximately
the same size as the deleted gene. This and many
subsequent reports indicated that, while there may
be no intrinsic limit to the size of replicon vectors in
protoplasts, systemic infection is dependent on preserving the size of the wild-type DNA A component.
A further limitation to this system is that the transmissibility of the recombinant genomes is poor,

probably because they are not packaged. One way
in which this can be addressed is to generate transgenic plants in which recombinant viral genomes
are produced in every cell. This is achieved by transforming plants with DNA constructs containing a
partially duplicated viral genome (Meyer et al. 1992).
Intact replicons can excise from the delivered transgene in the same way as the MSV genome escapes
during agroinfection, and autonomously replicating episomal copies can be detected. Transgenic
tobacco plants have also been produced carrying an
integrated copy of DNA B (Hayes et al. 1988, 1989).
In the presence of replication functions supplied
by DNA A, the DNA B sequence is rescued from
the transgene and can replicate episomally. DNA B
can then provide movement functions to DNA A,
facilitating the systemic spread of the vector.
Most plant virus expression vectors are based
on RNA viruses because they can accept larger
transgenes than DNA viruses
Most plant RNA viruses have a filamentous morphology, so the packaging constraints affecting the
use of DNA viruses such CaMV should not present a
limitation in vector development. However, investigation into the use of RNA viruses as vectors lagged
behind research on DNA viruses, awaiting the advent
of robust techniques for the manipulation of RNA
genomes.
A breakthrough was made in 1984, when a
full-length clone corresponding to the genome of
brome mosaic virus (BMV) was obtained. Infectious
RNA could be produced from this cDNA by in vitro
transcription (Ahlquist & Janda 1984, Ahlquist et al.
1984). The BMV genome comprises three segments:
RNA1, RNA2, and RNA3. Only RNA1 and RNA2 are
necessary for replication. RNA3, which is dicistronic,
encodes the viral coat protein and movement protein.
During BMV infection, a subgenomic RNA fragment
is synthesized from RNA3, containing the coat protein gene alone. It is therefore possible to replace
the coat protein gene with foreign DNA and still
generate a productive infection (Ahlquist et al. 1987).
This was demonstrated by French et al. (1986) in
an experiment where the coat protein gene was substituted with the cat reporter gene. Following the
introduction of recombinant RNA3 into barley protoplasts along with the essential RNA1 and RNA2
segments, high-level CAT activity was achieved.
This experiment showed that brome mosaic virus
was a potentially useful vector for foreign gene
expression. However, to date, BMV has been used

297

Gene transfer to plants

5‘

3‘
Genomic RNA

Subgenomic
mRNA for
movement protein

Movement protein
Subgenomic
mRNA for
capsid protein

Fig. 14.16 Genome
map and expression of
tobacco mosaic virus.

solely to study the function of genes from other plant
viruses. Following the demonstration that infectious
BMV RNA could be produced by in vitro transcription, the genomes of many other RNA viruses have
been prepared as cDNA copies. Some of these viruses
have been extensively developed as vectors for foreign gene expression (see comprehensive reviews by
Scholthof et al. 1996, Porta & Lomonossoff 2001).
Two examples are discussed below.
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) is one of the most
extensively studied plant viruses and was thus a
natural choice for vector development. The virus
has a monopartite RNA genome of 6.5 kb. At least
four polypeptides are produced, including a movement protein and a coat protein that are translated
from subgenomic RNAs (Fig. 14.16). The first use
of TMV as a vector was reported by Takamatsu et al.
(1987). They replaced the coat protein gene with
cat, and obtained infected plants showing high level
CAT activity at the site of infection. However, the
recombinant virus was unable to spread throughout the plant because the coat protein is required
for systemic infection.
Since there should be no packaging constraints
with TMV, Dawson et al. (1989) addressed the deficiencies of the TMV replacement vector by generating
a replication-competent addition vector in which the
entire wild-type genome was preserved. Dawson and
colleagues added the bacterial cat gene, controlled
by a duplicated coat protein subgenomic promoter,
between the authentic movement and coat protein
genes of the TMV genome. In this case, systemic
infection occurred in concert with high-level CAT
activity, but recombination events in infected plants
resulted in deletion of the transgene and the produc-

Capsid protein

tion of wild-type TMV RNA. Homologous recombination can be prevented by replacing the TMV coat
protein gene with the equivalent sequence from the
related Odontoglossum ringspot virus (Donson et al.
1991). This strategy has been used to produce a range
of very stable expression vectors that have been used
to synthesize a variety of valuable proteins in plants,
such as ribosome-inactivating protein (Kumagai
et al. 1993) and scFV antibodies (McCormick et al.
1999). It has also been possible to produce complete
monoclonal antibodies by co-infecting plants with
separate TMV vectors expressing the heavy and light
immunoglobulin chains (Verch et al. 1998).
Potato virus X (PVX) is the type member of the
Potexvirus family. Like TMV, it has a monopartite
RNA genome of approximately 6.5 kb which is packaged in a filamentous particle. The genome map of
PVX is shown in Fig. 14.17, and contains genes for
replication, viral movement, and the coat protein,
the latter expressed from a subgenomic promoter.
Reporter genes such as gusA and green fluorescent
protein have been added to the PVX genome under
the control of a duplicated coat protein subgenomic
promoter and can be expressed at high levels in
infected plants (Chapman et al. 1992, Baulcombe
et al. 1995). As with the early TMV vectors, there is a
tendency for the transgene to be lost by homologous
recombination, but in the case of PVX, no alternative virus has been identified whose coat protein
gene promoter can functionally substitute for the
endogenous viral promoter. For this reason, PVX is
generally not used for long-term expression, but
has been widely employed as a transient expression
vector. It has been used for the synthesis of valuable
proteins such as antibodies (e.g. Hendy et al. 1999,

298

CHAPTER 14

ORF1

ORF3

5’cap

AAA3’

Genomic RNA
5835 nt

ORF2

ORF4

ORF5

Polymerase

AAA3’

5’
Subgenomic RNA
ORF5

AAA3’

5’cap
Subgenomic mRNA
(coat protein)
Coat protein

Franconi et al. 1999, Ziegler et al. 2000) and for
the expression of genes that affect plant physiology
(e.g. the fungal avirulence gene avr9, HammondKosack et al. 1995).
The stable transformation of plants with cDNA
copies of the PVX genome potentially provides a
strategy for extremely high-level transgene expression, because transcripts should be amplified to a high
copy number during the viral replication cycle. However, instead of high-level expression, this strategy
leads to potent and consistent transgene silencing,
as well as resistance to viral infection (English et al.
1996, English & Baulcombe 1997). The basis of
this phenomenon and its implications for transgene
expression in plants are discussed in more detail in
Chapter 15. In terms of vector development, however,
it is notable that PVX-based vectors are probably
most widely used to study virus-induced gene silencing and related phenomena (Dalmay et al. 2000) and
to deliberately induce silencing of homologous plant
genes (reviewed by Baulcombe 1999).

Suggested reading
Cotsaftis O. & Guiderdoni E. (2005) Enhancing gene
targeting efficiency in higher plants: rice is on the
move. Transgenic Research 14, 1–14.
Daniel H., Khan M.S. & Allison L. (2002) Milestones in
chloroplast genetic engineering: an environmentally
friendly era in biotechnology. Trends in Plant Science
7, 84–91.
Daniel H., Kumar S. & Dufourmantel N. (2005)
Breakthrough in chloroplast genetic engineering of
agronomically important crops. Trends in Biotechnology 23, 238–45.

Fig. 14.17 Genome
map and expression of
potato virus X.

Gamborg O.L. (2002) Plant tissue culture. Biotechnology. Milestones. In vitro Cell Development Biology –
Plant 38, 84–92.
Gelvin S.B. (2000) Agrobacterium and plant genes
involved in T-DNA transfer and integration. Annual
Review of Plant Physiology 51, 223–56.
Gelvin S.B. (2003) Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation: the biology behind the “gene-Jockeying”
tool. Microbiology and Molecular Biology 67, 16.
Goodwin J.L., Pastori G.M., Davey M.R. & Jones H.D.
(2004) Selectable markers: antibiotic and herbicide
resistance. Methods in Molecular Biology 286, 191–202.
Hellens R., Mullineux P. & Klee H. (2000) A guide
to Agrobacterium binary Ti vectors. Trends in Plant
Science 5, 446–51.
Maliga, P. (2004) Plastid transformation in higher
plants. Annual Review of Plant Biology 55, 289–313.
Marillonnet S., Thoeringer C., Kandzia R., Klimyuk V. &
Gleba Y. (2005) Systemic Agrobacterium tumefaciensmediated transfection of viral replicons for efficient
transient expression in plants. Nature Biotechnology.
23, 718–23.
Porta C. & Lomonossoff G.P. (1996) Use of viral
replicons for the expression of genes in plants.
Molecular Biotechnology 5, 209–21.
Porta C. & Lomonossoff G.P. (2002) Viruses as vectors
for the expression of foreign sequences in plants.
Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering 19, 245–91.
Somers D.A. & Makarevitch I. (2004) Transgene
integration in plants: poking or patching holes in
promiscuous genomes? Current Opinion in Biotechnology 15, 126–31.
Taylor N.J. & Fauquet C.M. (2002) Microparticle bombardment as a tool in plant science and agricultural
biotechnology. DNA Cell Biology 21, 963–77.
Tzfira T. & Citovsky V. (2002) Partners-in-infection:
host proteins involved in the transformation of
plant cells by Agrobacterium. Trends in Cell Biology
12, 121–9.

CHAPTER 15
Advanced transgenic technology

Introduction
Gene transfer experiments in animals and plants
have evolved beyond the simple process of introducing additional DNA sequences into target genomes.
Now that DNA transfer is becoming routine in many
species, attention is shifting to more sophisticated
approaches which involve the precise control of transgenes and endogenous genes, both in terms of their
structure and their expression. Parallel advances
in animal and plant biotechnology have come about
through the development of inducible expression systems which facilitate the external regulation of transgenes, and through the exploitation of site-specific
recombination systems to make precise insertions
and modifications in target sequences. Transgenic
technology is particularly advanced in mice, where
combinations of gene targeting, site-specific recombination, and inducible transgene expression make
it possible to activate and inactivate both transgenes
and endogenous genes in a conditional manner.
Other routes to conditional gene silencing have
also been explored. These do not involve the direct
modification of the target gene but rather the expression of inhibitory genes whose products interfere
with the expression of the target. Although many
such strategies have been developed, e.g. antisense
RNA, ribozymes, interfering antibodies, and dominant negative mutants, one approach in particular
has risen to dominate the field. From rather obscure
beginnings, the phenomenon of RNA interference
(RNAi) has emerged as one of the most exciting
recent developments in molecular biology, and may
soon make the transition from laboratory to clinic.

Inducible expression systems allow
transgene expression to be controlled
by physical stimuli or the application of
small chemical modulators
In many gene transfer experiments, it is desirable

for the introduced transgene to be expressed in a
specific manner. In both animals and plants, cell- or
tissue-specific promoters are used to restrict transgene expression to certain areas of the organism.
In a commercial setting, for example, it is useful
to restrict transgene expression in animals to the
mammary glands, so that recombinant proteins can
be recovered from milk (Wall et al. 1999). Similarly,
it is useful to restrict transgene expression in plants
to the seeds, since this is a stable environment for
protein accumulation (Stoger et al. 2000). In other
cases, it may be necessary to control transgene expression more precisely. For example, if a recombinant
protein is toxic, constitutive high-level expression
would be lethal and would prevent the recovery of
stably transformed cell lines – under these circumstances the experimenter might want to choose the
best time to switch the transgene off. Such issues can
be addressed through the use of inducible expression
systems, in which transgene expression is controlled
by an external stimulus.
Some naturally occurring inducible
promoters can be used to control
transgene expression
A number of inducible expression systems have
been developed for animals and plants based on
promoters from endogenous cellular or viral genes.
An early example is the Drosophila heat-shock promoter. Most cells respond to elevated temperature
by synthesizing heat-shock proteins, which include
molecular chaperons and other proteins with protective functions (Parsell & Lindquist 1983). The
response is controlled at the level of transcription
by a heat-labile transcription factor, which binds
to heat-responsive promoters in the corresponding
genes. The promoter of the Drosophila hsp70 gene has
been widely used to drive transgene expression, both
in Drosophila itself (Lis et al. 1983) and in heterologous systems (e.g. Wurm et al. 1986). In transgenic
flies, any gene linked to the hsp70 promoter is more

300

CHAPTER 15

or less inactive at room temperature, but high-level
expression in all cells can be induced by heating to
37°C for about 30 min.
The heat-shock promoter is unusual, at least in
the context of inducible expression constructs, in
that the stimulus that activates it is physical. Most
inducible promoters used to control transgene expression respond to chemicals, which must be supplied
to the transformed cells or transgenic organisms in
order to activate the expression of a linked transgene.
In mammals, several promoters are known to be
activated by glucocorticoid hormones or synthetic
analogs such as dexamethasone. Two of these have
been extensively used for inducible transgene expression – the mouse metallothionein promoter (Hager &
Palmiter 1981) and the long-terminal-repeat (LTR)
promoter of mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
(Lee et al. 1981). The metallothionein promoter
is also induced by interferons and heavy metals,
such as cadmium and zinc, allowing the transgene
to be activated in transgenic animals by including
a source of heavy metals in their drinking water.
An example of zinc-induced activation of a rat
growth-hormone gene in transgenic mice is discussed
on p. 259. A metal-inducible expression system has
also been developed for plants, although the components of the system are derived from yeast (Mett
et al. 1993). An ethanol-inducible system has also
been described (Roslan et al. 2001).
Endogenous chemically inducible promoters have
also been used to control transgene expression in
plants. Two systems have been widely employed:
the PR-1a promoter, which is induced by pathogen
infection and by chemical elicitors such as benzothiadiazole (Gorlach et al. 1996), and the maize In2–2
(Inducible gene 2–2) promoter, which is induced
by benzenesulfonamide safeners (agrochemicals
that are used to increase the tolerance of plants to
herbicides; De Veylder et al. 1997). The advantage
of these systems is that neither inducer is toxic to
plants so they can be applied safely in the field as well
as under laboratory conditions. Physically inducible
systems for plants have also been described: one
example is a peroxidase gene promoter isolated from
sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), which is inducible
by hydrogen peroxide, wounding, or ultraviolet light
(Kim et al. 2003). A wound-inducible promoter from
the tomato hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase 2 (HMGR2) gene has been used as the basis
of a commercial inducible promoter system called
MeGA-PharM (Mechanical Gene Activation Postharvest Manufacturing), which allows transgenes

encoding pharmaceutical proteins in plants to be
switched on after the leaves have been harvested
and shredded (Ma et al. 2003, Fischer et al. 2004).
Unfortunately, there are several limitations associated with the use of endogenous inducible promoters which limit their usefulness. First, they tend
to be somewhat leaky, i.e. there is a low to moderate
level of background transcription in the absence of
induction. Second, the level of stimulation achieved
by induction (the induction ratio) is often quite low,
typically less than 10-fold. Third, there are often
unwanted side effects caused by the activation of
other endogenous genes that respond to the same
inductive stimulus. The inducers used with many of
these endogenous promoters are also toxic or damaging if contact is prolonged. Finally, the kinetics of
induction are generally not ideal. For example, in
transgenic animals and plants, there may be differential uptake of the inducer into different cell types
and it may be eliminated slowly. For these reasons,
there has been great interest in the development of
alternative inducible expression systems.

Recombinant inducible systems are built
from components that are not found in
the host animal or plant
Many of the disadvantages of endogenous inducible promoters can be addressed using recombinant
systems, since these can be designed to work more
efficiently. All recombinant inducible expression
systems are based on a two-component principle in
which the transgenic organism is transformed with
a transgene encoding a transcription factor whose
activity is controlled by the external stimulus or
chemical, as well as a transgene regulated by that
transcription factor. Because the components are
heterologous, there should be no coincidental activation of other endogenous genes in the transgenic
organism. For the same reason, the inducer itself
should be non-toxic, because it does not interfere
with any endogenous processes. Current systems
aspire to the ideal in which the inducing agent is
taken up rapidly and evenly, but has a short half-life,
allowing rapid switching between induced and
non-induced states. A range of inducers might be
available with different properties. Steps towards
this ideal system have been achieved using promoters and transcription factors that are either
heterologous in the expression host or completely
artificial.

301

Advanced transgenic technology

The lac and tet repressor systems are based on
bacterial operons

from the reporter construct was blocked. However,
transcription could be derepressed by supplying the
cells with IPTG, resulting in strong chloramphenicol
transacetylase (CAT) activity.
A similar system, based on the E. coli tetracycline
operon, was developed for tobacco plants (Gatz &
Quail 1988). The tet operon is carried on a bacterial
transposon that confers resistance to the antibiotic
tetracycline. Similarly to the lac system, the tet operon
is switched off by a repressor protein, encoded by
the tetR gene, which binds to operator sites around
the promoter and blocks transcriptional initiation.
Tetracycline itself binds to this repressor protein
and causes the conformational change that releases
the tet operon from repression. Since tetracycline
inhibits bacteria at very low concentrations, the tet
repressor has a very high binding constant for the
antibiotic, allowing derepression in the presence
of just a few molecules. The tet repressor also has
very high affinity for its operator sites. Therefore, cell
cultures and transgenic tobacco plants expressing
TetR were able to inhibit reporter gene expression
from a cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter surrounded by three tet operator sites. This
repressed state could be lifted rapidly by the application of tetracycline (Gatz et al. 1991).
The lac and tet repressor systems both show
minimal background transcription in the presence
of the appropriate repressor protein, and a high
induction ratio is therefore possible. In the lac system
the maximum induction ratio is approximately 50,
whereas in the tet system up to 500-fold induction
has been achieved (Figge et al. 1988, Gatz et al. 1992).

The first heterologous systems were based on
bacterial control circuits (Fig. 15.1). Hu & Davidson
(1987) developed an inducible expression system for
mammalian cells, incorporating the essential elements
of the lac repressor control circuit. In Escherichia coli,
transcription of the lac operon is switched off in the
absence of lactose by a repressor protein encoded
by the gene lacI. This protein binds to operator sites,
the most important of which lies just downstream
from the promoter, and thus inhibits transcriptional
initiation. In the presence of lactose or a suitable
analog, such as isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside (IPTG),
the Lac repressor undergoes a conformational change
that causes it to be released from the operator sites,
allowing transcription to commence.
In order to use the lac circuit in eukaryotic cells,
Hu & Davison (1987) modified the lacI gene by
adding a eukaryotic initiation codon, and then
made a hybrid construct in which this gene was
driven by the Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) LTR promoter. The construct was introduced into mouse
fibroblasts and a cell line was selected that constitutively expressed the Lac repressor protein. This
cell line was transiently transfected with a number
of plasmids containing the cat reporter gene, driven
by a modified simian virus 40 (SV40) promoter.
Each of these plasmids also contained a lac operator
site somewhere within the expression construct.
The investigators found that, when the operator sites
were placed in the promoter region, transcription

Repressor gene
P

No induction

With induction
I

R

R
P

Fig. 15.1 Summary of
repression-based inducible
expression-control circuits based
on the lac and tet operons of E. coli.
P = promoter.

Target gene

R

Target gene

O

P

O

Component

Lac system

Tet system

Repressor gene

lac I

tet R

R

Lac repressor

Tet repressor

I

IPTG

tetracycline/doxycycline

O

lac operator

tet operator

I

302

CHAPTER 15

Remarkably, the bacterial repressor proteins appear
quite capable of interacting with the eukaryotic
transcriptional apparatus and functioning as they
do in bacteria, despite the many mechanistic differences in transcriptional control between prokaryotes
and eukaryotes.
The tet activator and reverse activator
systems were developed to circumvent
some of the limitations of the original
tet system
A disadvantage of repressor-based systems is that,
in order to function effectively, high-level constitutive expression of repressor molecules is required
to suppress background transgene activity. However, both the LacI and TetR proteins are cytotoxic
at high levels.
To address these problems, TetR and LacI have
been converted into activators by generating fusion
proteins, in which the repressor is joined to the herpes
simplex virus (HSV) VP16 transactivator (Labow
et al. 1990, Gossen & Bujard 1992). In these systems,
only the DNA-binding specificity of the repressor
proteins is exploited. The binding of the modified
bacterial proteins to operator sites within the transgene leads to transcriptional activation, because the
VP16 protein acts positively on the transcriptional
apparatus. The operator sites have effectively become
enhancers and the inducers (IPTG and tetracycline)
have effectively become repressors (Fig. 15.2). The
tet transactivator (tTA) system has been more widely
used than the equivalent lac system, because very
high levels of IPTG are required to inhibit LacI binding in mammalian cells and this is toxic (Figge et al.
1988). Many different proteins have been produced

in mammalian cell lines using the tTA system,
particularly cytotoxic proteins, whose constitutive
expression would rapidly lead to cell death (Wu &
Chiang 1996). In cells, a low background activity has
been reported and an induction ratio of approximately 105 can be achieved. However, toxic effects of
prolonged tetracycline exposure have been reported
in transgenic animals, as well as unequal uptake of
tetracycline into different organs, resulting in fluctuating basal transcription levels and cell-specific effects
(reviewed by Saez et al. 1997).
A further modification to the tet system has led
to marked improvements. A mutated form of the
tTA protein has been generated whose DNA-binding
activity is dependent on rather than abolished by
tetracycline (Gossen et al. 1995). This protein is called
reverse tTA (rtTA) and becomes an activator in the
presence of tetracycline. In this system, the antibiotic
is once again an inducer, but there is no requirement for prolonged exposure (Fig. 15.3). An early
example of the use of this system is described by
Bohl et al. (1997). Myoblasts were transformed with
the rtTA system using a retroviral vector in which
erythropoietin cDNA was placed under the control of
a tetracycline-inducible promoter. These cells were
implanted into mice, and erythropoietin secretion
could be controlled by feeding the mice doxycycline,
a derivative of tetracycline with a shorter half-life.
An important finding was that long-term control of
the secretion of this hormone was possible, with
significant implications for the use of inducible
expression systems for gene therapy. Unfortunately,
the mutations that reverse the effect of doxycycline
also reduce its binding activity, so up to 10 times
more antibiotic is required to activate rtTA than
inhibit tTA. More recently, new versions of rtTA

tTA
P

–Tet

+Tet
TET

t TA
t TA

t TA
P

tetO

Target gene

Target gene
P

tetO

Fig. 15.2 The tet transactivator
(tTA) system.

303

Advanced transgenic technology

rt TA
P

–Tet

rt TA

Target gene
P

tetO

rt TA

+Tet

TET
rt TA
P

Target gene

tetO

Fig. 15.3 The reverse tet
transactivator (rtTA) system.

have been developed with mutations at a different site that does not affect doxycycline binding
(Urlinger et al. 2000, Lamartina et al. 2002). Another
limitation of the original rtTA system is that the
regulator displays a significant residual binding
to the tet operator in the absence of doxycycline.
This has been addressed by the development of Tetrepressible transcriptional repressors or suppressors
tTR and tTS, which out-compete rtTA for tet operator sites in the absence of doxycycline, but are unable
to bind when the antibiotic is present. They do not,
however, physically interact with rtTA (Zhu et al.
2001). A reverse-transactivator lac system has also
been developed, with an induction ratio of approximately 104 (Baim et al. 1991). Another system, based
on the pristinamycin (Pip) operon, is available in
standard and reverse formats induced by antibiotics
of the streptogramin family (Fussenegger et al. 2000).
The availability of different systems should allow
multiple transgenes to be controlled independently
by different inducers (Corbel & Ross 2002).
Steroid hormones also make suitable
heterologous inducers
Steroid hormones are lipophilic molecules that penetrate cells rapidly and are eliminated within a few
hours. The use of heterologous steroids for inducible
transgene expression is advantageous because, in
addition to their favorable kinetics, such molecules
should not activate endogenous signaling pathways
in the expression host and should therefore have
limited toxicity.
Ecdysone is a steroid hormone found only in insects
and is responsible for the extensive morphological
changes that occur during molting. As with other
steroid-like signaling molecules, the hormone acts

through a heterodimeric transcription factor of the
nuclear receptor family. In Drosophila, this receptor
comprises the products of the genes ecdysone receptor
(ecr) and ultraspiracle (usp). The hormone and its
signaling pathway are not found in mammalian
cells. Therefore, transgenes including an ecdysone
response element in the promoter can be induced
by exogenously supplied ecdysone or its analog,
muristerone A, in cells or transgenic animals expressing the components of the Drosophila receptor. The
unmodified Drosophila system has a poor induction ratio, but this can be improved using chimeric
receptors and mammalian components (Yao et al.
1992, 1993). In a significant improvement, No and
colleagues were able to achieve an induction ratio
of 104 by generating a hybrid system in which the
ecdysone receptor gene was expressed as a fusion
with the HSV VP16 transactivator, and the ultraspiracle protein was replaced with a mammalian
homolog, the retinoid X receptor. Background
activity was reduced to near zero by altering the
DNA sequence recognized by the hybrid receptor
(No et al. 1996).
The ecdysone system has also been employed
successfully in plants. This is due to the identification and development of non-steroidal agonists of
the ecdysone receptor which are safe for field use.
For example, Martinez et al. (1999) developed a
hybrid system consisting of the tobacco budworm
ecdysone receptor ligand-binding domain fused to
the glucocorticoid receptor DNA-binding domain
and the VP16 transactivation domain. The receptor responds to tebufenozide (an insecticide better
known by its trade name CONFIRM). Similarly,
Padidam et al. (2003) have developed a system that
is based on the spruce budworm ecdysone receptor
ligand-binding domain, and responds to another

304

CHAPTER 15

common insecticide, methoxyfenozide (INTREPID).
Another system based on the European corn borer
ecdysone receptor also responds to this insecticide
(Unger et al. 2002).
The glucocorticoid receptor has also been developed as a heterologous system in plants (Schena et al.
1991, Aoyama & Chua 1997, Moore et al. 1997).
The system described by Aoyama & Chua comprises
the glucocorticoid-receptor steroid-binding domain
fused to the DNA-binding domain of the yeast transcription factor GAL4 and the VP16 transactivation domain. In this system, a CaMV 35S promoter
modified to contain six GAL4-recognition sites is
used to drive transgene expression. Genes placed
under the control of this promoter can be induced
100-fold in the presence of dexamethasone. In a
recent application, this system was used to express
a viral replicase in a plant also expressing human
γ-interferon. The intrinsic amplification stimulated
gene expression more than 300-fold over the unamplified system (Mori et al. 2001). Another interesting
development is a dual system which is activated
by dexamethasone and repressed by tetracycline
(Bohner et al. 1999).
Chemically induced dimerization exploits
the ability of a divalent ligand to bind two
proteins simultaneously
A further strategy for inducible transgene regulation
has been developed, exploiting essentially the same
principles as the yeast two-hybrid system (p. 459).
This technique, termed chemically induced dimerization (CID), involves the use of a synthetic divalent
ligand to simultaneously bind and hence bring
together separate DNA-binding and transactivation
domains to generate a functional transcription factor.
The initial system utilized the immunosuppressant
drug FK-506. This binds with high specificity to
an immunophilin protein called FKBP12, forming
a complex that suppresses the immune system by
inhibiting the maturation of T cells (reviewed by
Schreiber 1991). For transgene induction, an artificial homodimer of FK-506 was created, which could
simultaneously bind to two immunophilin domains.
Therefore, by expressing fusion proteins in which
the GAL4 DNA-binding domain and the VP16
transactivator were each joined to an immunophilin
domain, the synthetic homodimer could recruit a
functional hybrid transcription factor capable of
activating any transgene carrying GAL4 recognition
elements (Belshaw et al. 1996).

Since this homodimer can also recruit nonproductive combinations (e.g. two GAL4 fusions),
an improved system has been developed using
an artificial heterodimer specific for two different
immunophilins (Belshaw et al. 1996). In this case,
FK-506 was linked to cyclosporin A, a drug that
binds specifically to a distinct target, cyclophilin.
This heterodimer was shown to assemble effectively
a transcription factor comprising an FKBP12-GAL4
fusion and a cyclophilin-VP16 fusion, resulting in
strong and specific activation of a reporter gene in
mammalian cells (Fig. 15.4). A more versatile system
has been developed that exploits the ability of another
immunosupressant drug, rapamycin, to mediate the
heterodimerization of FKBP12 and a kinase known
as FRAP (Rivera et al. 1996). In this system, FKBP12
and FRAP are each expressed as fusions with the
components of a functional transcription factor.
In the absence of rapamycin there is no interaction
between these fusions, but when the drug is supplied
they assemble into a hybrid transcription factor
that can activate transgene expression. Transgenic
mice containing a growth-hormone gene controlled
by a CID-regulated promoter showed no expression
in the absence of the inducer, but high levels of
human growth hormone 24 h after induction with
rapamycin (Magari et al. 1997). The advantage of
this system is that rapamycin is rapidly taken up by
cells in vivo, and it decays rapidly. The major disadvantage of immunosuppressant drugs as chemical
inducers of dimerization is their pharmacological
side effects. Various analogs of rapamycin (rapalogs)
have therefore been developed that do not have
significant pharmacological effects. Indeed, the
best systems use rapalogs that no longer bind to
endogenous FKBP and FRAP, but only interact with
modified derivatives developed especially for the
CID system. Other advantages of rapalogs include
their prolonged bioavailability following oral administration and their ability to cross the blood–brain
barrier. In the most popular version of the system
(Fig. 15.5) three copies of FKBP are joined to a
synthetic DNA-binding domain comprising a pair
of zinc fingers and a homeodomain, which binds
a novel response element, whereas the FKBPrapamycin binding domain of FRAP is joined to the
p65 activation domain subunit of NF-κB. Generally,
both hybrid components are expressed from a single
transcription unit using an internal ribosome entry
site. The target promoter contains 12 copies of the
target site followed by a TATA box (Auicchio et al.
2002 a,b, Chong et al. 2002).

305

Advanced transgenic technology

FK–506
Specific interactions

C

Immunophilin

I

Synthetic dimer

Cyclosporin A
Cyclophilin

FK–506/Cyclosporin A

Chimeric constructs

Immunophilin GAL4
Immunophilin

Cyclophilin
Cyclophilin

GAL4

P

Fig. 15.4 Overview of
chemically induced
dimerization between
the synthetic FK506/cyclosporin A
conjugate and fusion
proteins containing
immunophilin and
cyclosporin domains.
Dimerization assembles
a functional
transcription factor
that can activate a
promoter with GAL4
response elements.

VP16

P

GAL4

VP16

I

– CID

+ CID

I

I

GAL4

C

C

GAL4 VP16

Target gene

P

Target gene

P

(a)

p65
FRAPL

Rapalog
3 × FKBP

Fig. 15.5 (a) A frequently used
configuration of the rapamycin
system, in which three tandem
copies of the human FKBP are
fused to a synthetic DNA-binding
domain and FRAP is fused to the
DNA activation domain of p65.
Rapamycin facilitates interaction
between FKBP and FRAP, leading to
the assembly of functional
transcription factor. (b) Detailed
structure of the construct encoding
the three copies of FKBP and the
synthetic DNA-binding domain
ZFHD1 (zinc finger homeodomain
1). ECMV-IRES is the internal
ribosome entry site from
encephalomyocarditis virus.
(c) Structure of a typical target gene
showing 12 tandem copies of the
ZFHD1-binding site.

ZFHD1

(b)

p65 (281–551) HSF1 (406–629)

FRAPL

p65 (361–551)

CMV

ZFHD1
ECMV–IRES

(c)
Target gene
12 × ZFHD1 BS
(Z12)

min IL-2

F

F

F

306

CHAPTER 15

Not all inducible expression systems are
transcriptional switches
The inducible expression systems discussed above
are all regulated at the level of transcription, such
that there is often a significant delay between induction and response and between removal of induction
and return to the basal state. Where a rapid response
to induction is critical, inducible systems that operate
at the post-translational level can be utilized. For
example, the mammalian estrogen receptor exists in
an inert state in the absence of estrogen, because the
hormone-binding domain interacts with heat-shock
protein 90 (Hsp90) to form an inactive complex.
When estrogen is present, it binds to its receptor,
causing a conformational change that releases the
receptor from Hsp90. The receptor is then free to
dimerize and interact with DNA (Fig. 15.6). In principle, any protein expressed as a fusion with the
estrogen-binding domain will similarly interact with
Hsp90 and form an inactive complex (Picard 1994).
A recombinant protein can thus be expressed at high
levels in an inactive state, but can be activated by
feeding cells or transgenic animals with estrogen or
an analog, such as Tamoxifen, which does not induce
endogenous estrogen-responsive genes (Littlewood
et al. 1995). A similar system has been devised using

ER

X

P

ER-X
Hsp90

Inactive

ER-X

Active

Estrogen

Hsp90

Fig. 15.6 The estrogen-inducible expression system, which
works at the post-translational level – see text for details.

a mutant-form progesterone receptor, which can
no longer bind progesterone but can be induced
with the antiprogestin RU486 (Garcia et al. 1992,
Vegeto et al. 1992). An induction ratio of up to 3500
has been demonstrated in transgenic mice and,
importantly, the inductive response occurs when
the drug is supplied at a dose more than 100-fold
below that required for it to function as an antiprogestin (Wang et al. 1997a,b).

Site-specific recombination allows precise
manipulation of the genome in organisms
where gene targeting is inefficient
Until recently, there was no generally applicable
method for the precise in vivo manipulation of DNA
sequences in animal and plant genomes. In mice,
gene targeting by homologous recombination allows
specific changes to be introduced into pre-selected
genes, but it had proved impossible to extend the
technique to other animals or to plants. Furthermore, even gene targeting is limited by the fact that
the targeted gene is modified in the germline; thus
all cells in the mouse are similarly affected from
the beginning of development and throughout its
entire lifetime.
Over the last 10 years, general methods have
become available that allow in vivo transgene manipulation in any animal or plant species. Importantly,
by using such methods in concert with inducible or
cell-type-specific expression systems, it is possible to
generate transgenic organisms in which transgenes
can be conditionally modified. In mice, the use of
these methods in combination with gene targeting allows the production of conditional mutants
(conditional knockouts), in which an endogenous
gene is inactivated specifically in certain cell types or
at a particular stage of development. These methods
are based on a specialized genetic process, termed
site-specific recombination.
Site-specific recombination differs from homologous recombination in several important respects.
In terms of gene manipulation, the most important differences between these processes concern
the availability of the recombinase and the size and
specificity of its target sequence. Homologous recombination is a ubiquitous process that relies on
endogenous recombinase enzymes present in every
cell, whereas site-specific recombination systems
are very specialized and different systems are found

307

Advanced transgenic technology

in different organisms. Homologous recombination
occurs between DNA sequences with long regions
of homology but no particular sequence specificity,
whereas site-specific recombination occurs at short,
specific recognition sites. This means that target
sites for site-specific recombination can be introduced easily and unobtrusively into transgenes, but
recombination will only occur in a heterologous
cell if a source of recombinase is also supplied. The
power of site-specific recombination as a tool for
genome manipulation thus relies on the ability of
the experimenter to supply the recombinase enzyme
on a conditional basis.
A number of different site-specific recombination
systems have been identified and several have been
studied in detail (reviewed by Craig 1988, Sadowski
1993). Some recombinases, such as bacteriophage
λ integrase, require various accessory proteins for
efficient recombination. However, the simplest systems require only the recombinase and its target
sequence. Of these, the most extensively used are Cre
recombinase from bacteriophage P1 (Lewanodski &
Martin 1997) and FLP recombinase (flippase) from
the 2 µm plasmid of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(Buchholz et al. 1998). These have been shown to
function in many heterologous eukaryotic systems
including mammalian cells and transgenic animals
and plants (reviewed by Sauer 1994, Ow 1996,
Metzger & Feil 1999). Both recombinases recognize
34 bp sites (termed loxP and FRP, respectively) comprising a pair of 13 bp inverted repeats surrounding
an 8 bp central element. FRP possesses an additional
copy of the 13 bp repeat sequence, although this has
been shown to be non-essential for recombination.
Cre recombinase has been used most extensively
in mammals, because it works optimally at 37°C.
The optimal temperature for FLP recombinase is
30°C (Buchholz et al. 1996). However, the greatest
advantages are seen if multiple systems can be used
simultaneously, as has been proposed as a strategy
to develop marker-free transgenic plants (Srivastava
& Ow 2004).
Site-specific recombination can be used to
delete unwanted transgenes
The reaction catalyzed by Cre recombinase is shown
in Fig. 15.7. If two loxP sites are arranged as direct
repeats, the recombinase will delete any intervening
DNA, leaving a single loxP site remaining in the
genome. If the loxP sites are arranged as inverted

A T A A C T T C GT A T A A T GT A T GC T A T A C GA A GT T A T
T A T T GA A GC A T A T T A C A T A C GA T A T GC T T C A A T A

CRE
+

CRE

Fig. 15.7 Structure of the loxP site and reactions catalyzed
by Cre recombinase when paired loxP sites, shown as arrows,
are arranged in different orientations.

repeats, the intervening DNA segment is inverted.
Both reactions are reversible. However, when the loxP
sites are arranged in the same orientation, excision
is favored over reintegration, because the excised
DNA fragment is rapidly degraded.
The ability of flanking loxP sites to delineate any
sequence of interest for site-specific deletion has
numerous applications. The most obvious of these is
the deletion of unwanted sequences, such as marker
genes. This approach has been used, for example,
as a simplified strategy to generate targeted mutant mice containing point mutations. Recall from
Chapter 13 that traditional strategies for generating subtle mutants in mice involve two rounds of
homologous recombination in embryonic stem
cells (ES cells) (p. 258). Such strategies are very
inefficient, because homologous recombination is a
rare event. However, in the Cre recombinase-based
approach, a second round of homologous recombination is unnecessary (Kilby et al. 1993). As shown
in Fig. 15.8, gene targeting is used to replace the
wild-type allele of a given endogenous gene with an
allele containing a point mutation, and simultaneously to introduce markers, such as neo and Tk, for
positive and negative selection. The positive–negative
selection markers within the homology region are
flanked by loxP sites. A second negative marker (e.g.
the gene for diphtheria toxin) is included outside the
homology region to select against random integration

308

CHAPTER 15

1

2

3

>

5

>
neo

2

4

Tk

3*

Locus

Targeting
construct

dipA

Homologous recombination
select on G418
>
1

>
neo

2

Tk

3*

4

5

Targeted
locus

CRE-mediated recombination
select on ganciclovir/FIAU
>
1

2

3*

4

5

Clean
replacement

Fig. 15.8 Gene targeting followed by marker excision, catalyzed by Cre recombinase. Initially, positive and negative markers
(neo and Tk), flanked by loxP sites, are introduced by homologous recombination (a second negative marker, in this case encoding
diphtheria toxin (DIPA), is included outside the homology region to eliminate random integration events). Following selection for
neo on G418, Cre recombinase is used to excise both markers, leaving a single loxP site remaining in the genome. The excision
event can be identified by selection for the absence of Tk, using ganciclovir or FIAU. Asterisk indicates mutation.

events. Cells that have lost the diphtheria-toxin gene
and survive selection for neo are likely to represent
authentic targeting events. Such cells are then transfected with a plasmid expressing Cre recombinase,
which catalyzes the excision of the remaining markers, leaving a clean point mutation and no evidence
of tinkering except for a single loxP site remaining in
one intron. Negative selection using ganciclovir or
1-(2-deoxy-2-fluoro-β-d-arabinofuranosyl)-5 iodouracil (FIAU) identifies cells that have lost the markers
by selection against Tk.
Similar strategies can be used to remove marker
genes from plants, as first demonstrated by Dale &
Ow (1991). These investigators used Agrobacterium
to transform tobacco-leaf explants with a CaMV
35S-luciferase reporter construct. The transfer DNA
(T-DNA) also contained a selectable marker for
hygromycin resistance, flanked by loxP sites. Transgenic plants were regenerated under hygromycin
selection and leaf explants from these plants were
then transformed with a second construct, in which
Cre recombinase was driven by the CaMV 35S
promoter. This construct also contained the nptII
gene and the second-round transgenic plants were
selected on kanamycin. Ten of the 11 plants tested
were found to be hygromycin-sensitive, even though
they continued to express luciferase, showing that
the original marker had been excised. Since the
cre/nptII construct was introduced separately, it was
not linked to the original T-DNA and segregated
in future generations, leaving “clean” transgenic
plants containing the luciferase transgene alone.

Site-specific recombination can be used to
activate transgene expression or switch
between alternative transgenes
While commonly used as a method to inactivate
transgenes by deletion, site-specific recombination
can also activate transgenes or switch between the
expression of two transgenes (Fig. 15.9). In one
method, termed recombinase-activated gene expression
(RAGE), a blocking sequence, such as a polyadenylation site, is placed between the transgene and its promoter, such that the transgene cannot be expressed.
If this blocking sequence is flanked by loxP sites, Cre
recombinase can be used to excise the sequence and
activate the transgene.
This strategy was first used in transgenic mice
to study the effect of SV40 T-antigen expression
in development (Pichel et al. 1993). In this case,
Cre recombinase was expressed under the control of
a developmentally regulated promoter. Essentially
the same strategy was used in transgenic tobacco
plants to activate a reporter gene in seeds (Odell et al.
1994). In this case, Cre recombinase was expressed
under the control of a seed-specific promoter. An
important feature of both these experiments was the
use of two separate transgenic lines, one expressing
Cre recombinase in a regulated manner and one
containing the target gene. Crosses between these
lines brought both transgenes together in the hybrid
progeny, resulting in the conditional activation of
the transgene based on the expression profile of
Cre. This is an extremely versatile and widely used

Advanced transgenic technology

P

poly A

Target gene

+ Cre recombinase

P

Target gene

Fig. 15.9 Overview of the recombinase-activated gene
expression (RAGE) strategy. A polyadenylation signal is
inserted between the promoter and target gene, blocking its
expression. However, if this signal is flanked by loxP sites,
Cre recombinase can be used to excise the block, bringing
the promoter and gene into juxtaposition and thus
activating gene expression.

strategy, because it allows “mix and match” between
different Cre transgenic and “responder” lines. We
return to this subject below.
Site-specific recombination can facilitate
precise transgene integration
Site-specific integration of transgenes can occur if
the genome contains a recombinase recognition
site. This may be introduced by random integration
or (in mice) by gene targeting. Using an unmodified
Cre-loxP system, transgene integration occurs at a
low efficiency, because, as discussed above, the equilibrium of the reaction is shifted in favor of excision.
Initial attempts to overcome this problem by providing transient Cre activity had limited success (see
Sauer & Henderson 1990, Baubonis & Saur 1993).
However, high-efficiency Cre-mediated integration
has been achieved in plants (Albert et al. 1995) and
mammalian cells (Feng et al. 1999) using mutated or
inverted loxP sites. Site-specific transgene integration into mammalian cells has also been achieved
using FLP recombinase (O’Gorman et al. 1991).
With recent pressure to develop marker-free
transgenic animals and plants in the biotechnology
industry, this area of research has benefited from
a large amount of funding. Particular progress has
been made with commercially important crops such
as rice, where targeted integration is now possible
at efficiencies that yield hundreds of clones per
experiment (Srivastava & Ow 2002, Srivastava et al.
2004). Transgene integration by site-specific recombination has many advantages over the random
integration that is normally achieved by illegitimate recombination. For example, if a region of the
genome can be identified that is not subject to nega-

309

tive position effects (Box 13.2), transgenic lines with
a loxP site at this position can be used for the stable
and high-level expression of any transgene (e.g.
Fukushige & Sauer 1992). Also, due to the precise
nature of site-specific recombination, transgenic loci
generated by this method are likely to be less complex than loci generated by random integration.
Site-specific recombination can facilitate
chromosome engineering
Site-specific recombination between widely separated
target sites or target sites on different chromosomes
can be used to generate large deletions, translocations, and other types of chromosome mutation.
Chromosome engineering by site-specific recombination was first reported by Golic (1991), using FLP
recombinase in Drosophila, but similar experiments
have now been carried out in plants and mice. Precise
intra-chromosomal deletions can be generated in
mice by two rounds of gene targeting, introducing
loxP sites at distant sites, followed by Cre-mediated
recombination (Ramirez-Solis et al. 1995, Li et al.
1996). In plants, where gene targeting is very
inefficient, an ingenious scheme has been developed
where loxP sites are arranged in tandem on a transformation construct, one inside a Ds transposon and
one outside. The transposon is placed between a
marker gene and its promoter. When this construct
is introduced into tobacco plants containing the
autonomous transposon Ac to provide a source of
transposase, the Ds element can excise from the
transgene, as revealed by marker-gene expression.
In most heterologous plants, Ac-Ds elements reintegrate at a position that is linked to the original
site. Although the site of reintegration cannot be
controlled, this nevertheless defines a large chromosomal segment that can be excised by Cre recombinase (Medberry et al. 1995, Osbourne et al. 1995).
Translocations are more difficult to engineer,
because interchromosomal site-specific recombination is inefficient, and inventive selection strategies
are required to identify the desired products (e.g. see
Qin et al. 1994, Smith et al. 1995, Van Deursen et al.
1995).
Inducible site-specific recombination allows
the production of conditional mutants and
externally regulated transgene excision
In mice, gene targeting and site-specific recombination can be used in a powerful combined approach

310

CHAPTER 15

Box 15.1 Visible marker genes
Reporter genes are widely used for in vitro
assays of promoter activity (Box 12.1).
However, reporters that can be used as
cytological or histological markers are more
versatile, because they allow gene expression
profiles to be determined in intact cells and
whole organisms.
b-galactosidase and b-glucuronidase
The E. coli lacZ gene encodes b-galactosidase,
an enzyme that hydrolyzes b-Dgalactopyranosides, such as lactose, as well as
various synthetic analogs. Like CAT, bgalactosidase activity can be assayed in vitro,
although with the advantage that the assays
are non-radioactive. For example, cell lysates
can be assayed spectrophotometrically using
the chromogenic substrate ONPG*, which
yields a soluble yellow compound (Norton &
Coffin 1985). Alternatively, a more sensitive
fluorometric assay may be preferred, using
the substrate MUG*. For histological staining,
the substrate Xgal* yields an insoluble blue
precipitate that marks cells brightly. The lacZ
gene was first expressed in mammalian cells
by Hall et al. (1983) to confirm transfection.
For these experiments, the gene was linked to
the SV40 early promoter and the mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) LTR promoter.
Fusions between the hsp70 promoter and lacZ
were also constructed and shown to drive
heat-shock-inducible b-galactosidase
expression in Drosophila (Lis et al. 1983). One
disadvantage of lacZ as a marker is that certain
mammalian cells, and many plants, show a
high level of endogenous b-galactosidase
activity, which can obscure the analysis of
chimeric genes (Helmer et al. 1984). The
E. coli gusA gene, which encodes the enzyme
b-glucuronidase (GUS), is an alternative
( Jefferson et al. 1986). This marker is preferred
in plants, due to the minimal background
activity of the endogenous enzyme ( Jefferson
et al. 1987a), but has also been used
successfully in animals (e.g. Jefferson et al.
1987b). Similar in vitro and histological assay
formats to those described for b-galactosidase

are also available for GUS, e.g. a histochemical
substrate, X-gluc*, which yields an insoluble
blue precipitate.
Luciferase
CAT, GUS, and b-galactosidase are stable
proteins, which persist in the cells that express
them. One problem with stable reporter
proteins is that, while they provide useful
markers for gene activation, they are less
useful for assaying transcriptional repression or
rapid changes in gene activity. Luciferase was
introduced as a novel reporter gene in 1986,
for use in both plants (Ow et al. 1986) and
animals (De Wet et al. 1987). The original
marker gene, luc, was isolated from the North
American firefly Photinus pyralis and encoded
a single polypeptide of 550 amino acids. The
enzyme catalyzes the oxidation of luciferin,
in a reaction requiring oxygen, ATP, and the
presence of magnesium ions. When excess
substrate is supplied, a flash of light is emitted
that is proportional to the amount of enzyme
present. This can be detected using a
luminometer, a scintillation counter as a
luminometer or even photographic film
(Wood & DeLuca 1987). Important
advantages of the luciferase system include its
very high sensitivity (more than 100-fold more
sensitive than lacZ) and the rapid decay of
light emission. Luciferase has therefore been
used to analyze the activity of genes with
oscillating expression profiles, such as the
Drosophila period gene (Brandes et al. 1996).
The amenability of the luciferase system has
been expanded by the isolation of alternative
luciferases from other organisms, which
bioluminesce in different colors (e.g. see
Thompson et al. 1990). A bacterial luciferase
gene, luxA, has also been used as a marker in
transgenic plants (Koncz et al. 1987).
Green fluorescent protein
The most recent addition to the growing
family of reporters is green fluorescent protein
(GFP), from the jellyfish Aequoria victoria. Over
continued

Advanced transgenic technology

Box 15.1
the last 5 years, this remarkable molecule has
emerged as one of the most versatile tools in
molecular and cellular biology and is being
used to investigate an increasing variety of
biological processes in bacteria, yeast, animals,
and plants (reviewed by Tsien 1998, Haseloff
et al. 1999, Ikawa et al. 1999, Naylor 1999).
GFP is a bioluminescent marker that causes
cells to emit bright green fluorescence when
exposed to blue or ultraviolet light. However,
unlike luciferase, GFP has no substrate
requirements and can therefore be used as a
vital marker to assay cellular processes in real
time. Other advantages of the molecule
include the fact that it is non-toxic, it does not
interfere with normal cellular activity and it is
stable even under harsh conditions (Ward &
Bokman 1982).
GFP was first used as a heterologous marker
in Caenorhabditis elegans (Chalfie et al. 1994).
However, early experiments with GFP
expression in a variety of other organisms,
including Drosophila (Wang & Hazelrigg
1994), mammalian cell lines (Marshall et al.
1995), and plants (Haseloff & Amos 1995,
Hu & Chen 1995, Sheen et al. 1995),
identified a number of difficulties in the
heterologous expression of the gfp gene.
Modifications have been necessary for robust
GFP expression in some plants (Chiu et al.
1996). In Arabidopsis, for example, the original
gfp gene is expressed very poorly due to
aberrant splicing. This problem was addressed
by removing a cryptic splice site recognized in
this plant (Haseloff et al. 1997). The original
gfp gene has been extensively modified to
alter various properties of the protein, such as
the excitation and emission wavelengths, to
increase the signal strength and to reduce

to generate conditional knockout mutants. Essentially, targeting vectors are designed so that part of
a selected endogenous gene becomes flanked by
loxP sites, or floxed. The usual strategy is to insert
the loxP sites into introns flanking an essential
exon, since this generally does not interfere with
the normal expression of the gene. Cre recombinase
is then supplied under the control of a cell-typespecific, developmentally regulated or inducible

311

continued
photobleaching (e.g. Heim & Tsein 1996,
Zolotukhin et al. 1996, Cormack et al. 1997).
As a result, many variations of the protein are
now available such as cyan fluorescent protein
(CFP) and yellow fluorescent protein (YFP),
which can be used for dual labeling (e.g. Tsien
& Miyawaki 1998; reviewed by Ellenberg et al.
1999). Fluorescent proteins of other colors are
also available, many from coral reef organisms.
For example, the proteins DsRed, AmCyn,
and ZsYellow are all coral-derived fluorescent
proteins available from Clontech. A mutant
form of red fluorescent protein from Anthoza
(Matz et al. 1999) changes from green to red
fluorescence over time, allowing it to be used
to characterize temporal gene expression
patterns (Terskikh et al. 2000).
GFP is particularly useful for generating
fusion proteins, providing a tag to localize
recombinant proteins in the cell. This
facilitates the investigation of intracellular
protein trafficking, and even the transport of
proteins between cells. An early example of
this application was the use of GFP to monitor
the movement of ribonucleprotein particles
during oogenesis in Drosophila (Wang &
Hazelrigg 1994). Kohler et al. (1997) have
used GFP to study the exchange of molecules
between plant organelles, while Wacker et al.
(1997) have investigated the transport of
a GFP-tagged protein along the secretory
pathway. The use of GFP to study the realtime dynamics of a systemic viral infection
in plants was described by Padgett et al.
(1996).
* Abbreviations: ONPG: O-nitrophenyl-b-D-galactopyranoside; MUG: 4-methylumbelliferyl-b-D-galactoside; Xgal:
5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-D-galactopyranoside; Xgluc: 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-D-glucuronic acid.

promoter, causing the gene segment defined by the
loxP sites to be deleted in cells or at the developmental stage specified by the experimenter. This
addresses a major limitation of traditional geneknockout techniques, i.e. that, if the mutation has
an embryonic lethal phenotype, only its earliest
effects can be investigated.
The general methodology for such experiments,
as we discussed earlier, is to cross two lines of

312

CHAPTER 15

transgenic mice, one carrying the floxed target gene
and the other carrying the conditional cre transgene.
As the number of reports of such experiments has
increased, more and more transgenic mouse lines
are becoming available, with Cre expressed under
the control of different conditional promoters. For
example, a mouse line with Cre expressed specifically
in the lens of the eye was generated by Lasko et al.
(1992). Lines are also available with Cre expressed
specifically in the mammary gland (Wagner et al.
1997) and developing sperm (O’Gorman et al. 1997).
Lines in which Cre is expressed in germ cells or in
early development are known as “deleter” lines and
are used to remove marker genes and generate Cremediated constitutive gene knockouts.
In the first examples of the conditional knockout approach, Gu et al. (1994) generated a Cre
transgenic line expressing the recombinase under
the control of the lck promoter, such that it was
expressed only in T cells. This strain was crossed to
targeted mice in which part of the DNA polymerase
β gene was floxed, leading to T-cell-specific excision
of an essential exon. Kuhn et al. (1995) mutated the
same gene, but they used the metallothionein promoter to express Cre recombinase, allowing induction of site-specific recombination with interferon.
Although successful, this experiment highlighted
many of the inadequacies of inducible promoters.
There was pronounced variation in the efficiency
of excision in different tissues, probably reflecting
differential uptake of the inducer. Furthermore,
high-level background activity of Cre was observed
in the spleen, resulting in excision of the gene segment in the absence of induction, probably caused
by the presence of endogenous interferons. The tTA
system has been used to bring Cre expression under
the control of tetracycline administration, although
a high level of background activity was also observed
in this experiment, resulting in excision of the target
gene prior to induction (St Ogne et al. 1996). Tighter
control has been possible using post-translational
induction. For example, Cre has been expressed as
a fusion with the ligand-binding domain of the
estrogen receptor (Fiel et al. 1996). When this transgene was crossed into an appropriate responder
strain, the background excision was minimal and
Cre was strongly induced by Tamoxifen. Several
strains of Cre mice are now available, in which
Tamoxifen- or RU486-induced site-specific recombination has been shown to be highly efficient (e.g.
Brocard et al. 1997, Wang et al. 1997a, Schwenk
et al. 1998).

As well as creating conditional mutants, inducible
site-specific recombination can be used to control
transgene excision externally. A number of reports
have been published recently in which Cre or FLP
recombinase has been expressed under inducible
control in plants using one of the systems discussed
at the beginning of the chapter. This allows the
recombinase gene to be maintained in an inactive
state until the stage of development at which the
marker needs to be removed. Furthermore, this
strategy is suitable for plants that are propagated
vegetatively. The typical strategy, which is to cross
plants containing a floxed transgene with plants
containing a conditionally expressed cre gene, is not
possible in plants that do not reproduce by sexual
crossing. However, by placing the cre gene under
inducible control, both the floxed transgene and the
cre gene can be introduced at the same time (Lyznik
et al. 1995, Sugita et al. 2000, Zuo et al. 2001, Hoff
et al. 2001, Zhang et al. 2003).

Many strategies for gene inactivation do
not require the direct modification of the
target gene
Traditional gene transfer strategies add new genetic
information to the genome, resulting in a gain-offunction phenotype conferred by the transgene. Gene
targeting and site-specific recombination now provide us with the ability to disrupt or delete specific
parts of the mouse genome, allowing loss-of-function
phenotypes to be studied, but this approach cannot
be used routinely in other animals or in plants. A
range of alternative, more widely applicable transgenic strategies have therefore been developed for
gene inhibition. These strategies involve the introduction of new genetic information into the genome,
but, instead of conferring a gain of function, the
transgene interferes with the expression of an endogenous gene, at either the RNA or the protein level.
The actual target gene is not affected. The resulting
loss-of-function effects are termed functional knockouts
or phenocopies.
Antisense RNA blocks the activity of mRNA
in a stoichiometric manner
Antisense RNA has the opposite sense to mRNA.
The presence of complementary sense and antisense
RNA molecules in the same cell can lead to the
formation of a stable duplex, which may interfere

Advanced transgenic technology

with gene expression at the level of transcription,
RNA processing, or possibly translation (Green
et al. 1986). Antisense RNA is used as a natural
mechanism to regulate gene expression in a number
of prokaryote systems (Simons & Kleckner 1988)
and, to a lesser extent, in eukaryotes (e.g. Kimelman
& Kirchner 1989, Lee et al. 1993, Savage & Fallon
1995).
Transient inhibition of particular genes can be
achieved by directly introducing antisense RNA or
antisense oligonucleotides into cells. However, the
transformation of cells with antisense transgenes
(in which the transgene is inverted with respect
to the promoter) allows the stable production of
antisense RNA and thus the long-term inhibition of
gene expression. This principle was established in
transgenic animals and plants at about the same
time. Katsuki et al. (1988) constructed an expression cassette in which the mouse myelin basic protein (MBP) cDNA was inverted with respect to the
promoter, thus producing antisense RNA directed
against the endogenous gene. In some of the transgenic mice, there was up to an 80% reduction in
the levels of MBP, resulting in the absence of myelin
from many axons and generating a phenocopy of
the myelin-depleted “shiverer” mutation. Smith et al.
(1988) generated transgenic tomato plants carrying
an antisense construct targeting the endogenous
polygalacturonase (pg) gene. The product of this
gene is an enzyme that causes softening and leads to
over-ripening. The levels of pg mRNA in transgenic
plants were reduced to 6% of the normal levels
and the fruit had a longer shelf-life and showed
resistance to bruising.
Antisense constructs have been widely used in
transgenic animals and plants for gene inhibition.
However, the efficiency of the technique varies widely
and the effects can, in some cases, be non-specific.
In some experiments, it has been possible to shut
down endogenous gene activity almost completely,
as demonstrated by Erickson et al. (1993), who used
an inverted cDNA to generate antisense RNA against
the mouse wnt-1 gene and reduced endogenous
mRNA levels to 2% of normal. Conversely, Munir
et al. (1990) designed a construct to generate antisense RNA corresponding to the first exon and intron
of the mouse Hprt gene, and observed no reduction
in endogenous mRNA levels at all, even though the
presence of antisense RNA was confirmed. The level
of inhibition apparently does not depend on the size
of the antisense RNA or the part of the endogenous
gene to which it is complementary. For example,

313

Moxham et al. (1993) achieved a 95% reduction in
the level of Gαi2 protein through the expression of
antisense RNA corresponding to only 39 bp of the
gene’s 5′ untranslated region.
Conditional gene silencing can be achieved by
placing antisense constructs under the control of
an inducible promoter. The expression of antisense
c-myc under the control of the MMTV LTR promoter
resulted in the normal growth of transformed cells
in the absence of induction, but almost complete
growth inhibition in the presence of dexamethasone
(Sklar et al. 1991). Experiments in which the tTA
system was used to control antisense expression in
plants have also been reported (e.g. Kumar et al.
1995).
Ribozymes are catalytic molecules that
destroy targeted mRNAs
Ribozymes are catalytic RNA molecules that carry
out site-specific cleavage and (in some cases) ligation
reactions on RNA substrates. The incorporation of
ribozyme catalytic centers into antisense RNA allows
the ribozyme to be targeted to particular mRNA
molecules, which are then cleaved and degraded
(reviewed by Rossi 1995, James & Gibson 1998). An
important potential advantage of ribozymes over
antisense RNA is their catalytic activity: ribozymes
are recycled after the cleavage reaction and can therefore inactivate many mRNA molecules. Conversely,
antisense inhibition relies on stoichiometric binding
between sense and antisense RNA molecules.
The use of ribozyme constructs for specific gene
inhibition in higher eukaryotes was established in
Drosophila. In the first such report, Heinrich et al.
(1983) injected Drosophila eggs with a P-element
vector containing a ribozyme construct targeted
against the white gene. They recovered transgenic
flies with reduced eye pigmentation, indicating that
expression of the endogenous gene had been inhibited. A ribozyme construct has also been expressed
under the control of a heat-shock promoter in
Drosophila (Zhao & Pick 1983). In this case, the
target was the developmental regulatory gene fushi
tarazu (ftz). It was possible to generate a series of
conditional mutants with ftz expression abolished
at particular stages of development, simply by
increasing the temperature to 37°C.
Ribozymes have also been used in mammalian cell
lines, predominantly for the study of oncogenes and
in attempts to confer resistance to viruses (reviewed
by Welch et al. 1998). There has been intensive

314

CHAPTER 15

research into ribozyme-mediated inhibition of HIV,
and remarkable success has been achieved using
retroviral vectors, particularly vectors carrying
multiple ribozymes (reviewed by Welch et al. 1998,
Muotri et al. 1999). So far, there have been relatively
few reports of ribozyme expression in transgenic
mice. Larsson et al. (1994) produced mice expressing three different ribozymes targeted against β2macroglobulin mRNA, and succeeded in reducing
endogenous RNA levels by 90%. Tissue-specific
expression of ribozymes has also been reported. A
ribozyme targeted against glucokinase mRNA was
expressed in transgenic mice under the control of
the insulin promoter, resulting in specific inhibition of the endogenous gene in the pancreas (Efrat
et al. 1994). Recently, retroviral delivery of antineuregulin ribozyme constructs into chicken embryos
has been reported (Zhao & Lemke 1998). Inhibition of neuregulin expression resulted in embryonic
lethality, generating a very close phenocopy of the
equivalent homozygous null mutation in mice.
Cosuppression is the inhibition of an
endogenous gene by the presence of a
homologous sense transgene
Cosuppression refers to the ability of a sense transgene to suppress the expression of a homologous endogenous gene. This surprising phenomenon was first
demonstrated in plants, in a series of experiments
designed to increase the levels of an endogenous protein by introducing extra copies of the corresponding
gene. In an attempt to increase the amount of pigment synthesized by petunia flowers, Napoli et al.
(1990) produced transgenic petunia plants carrying
multiple copies of the chalcone synthase (chs) gene.
This encodes an enzyme that converts coumaroylCoA and 3-malonyl-CoA into chalcone, a precursor
of anthocyanin pigments. The presence of multiple
transgene copies was expected to increase the level
of enzyme and result in deeper pigmentation. However, in about 50% of the plants recovered from the
experiment, exactly the opposite effect was observed,
i.e. the flowers were either pure white or variegated
with purple and white sectors. Similar findings
were reported by Van der Krol et al. (1988) using a
transgene encoding another pigment biosynthesis
enzyme, dihydroflavonol-4-reductase. In both cases,
it appeared that integration of multiple copies of the
transgene led to the suppression of some or all of the
transgenes and the cosuppression of homologous
endogenous genes.

While troublesome in terms of generating plant lines
with high transgene expression levels, cosuppression can also be exploited as a tool for specific gene
inactivation. There have been many reports of this
nature. For example, transgenic tomatoes have been
produced containing a partial copy of the pg gene in
the sense orientation (Smith et al. 1990). As with the
antisense pg transgenic plants generated previously
by the same group (see above), strong inhibition of
the endogenous gene was achieved, resulting in fruit
with a prolonged shelf-life. Cosuppression has also
been demonstrated in animals (Pal-Bhadra et al.
1997, Bahramian & Zabl 1999, Dernberg et al.
2000) and is related to a similar phenomenon called
quelling, which has been described in fungi (reviewed
by Selker 1997, 1999).
The mechanism of cosuppression in plants is complex and can involve silencing at either the transcriptional or post-transcriptional levels (for details,
see Box 15.2). One of the most remarkable aspects
of post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) is that
it is a systemic phenomenon, suggesting that a diffusible signal is involved. This can be demonstrated
by grafting a non-silenced transgenic scion onto a
silenced transgenic host. The silencing effect is able
to spread into the graft, and the systemic effect works
even if the two transgenic tissues are separated by
up to 30 cm of wild-type stem (Palauqui et al. 1997,
Voinnet et al. 1998).
PTGS in plants can be induced not only by
integrated transgenes but also by RNA viruses,
as long as there is a region of homology between
the virus genome and an integrated gene. For
example, the virus may carry a sequence that is
homologous to an endogenous gene or to a transgene integrated into the host genome. The effect
also works if the plant is transformed with a cDNA
construct corresponding to part of the virus genome,
as demonstrated by Angell & Baulcombe (1997).
The rationale behind this experiment was to transform plants with a cDNA construct corresponding
to a chimeric potato virus X (PVX) genome containing the gusA reporter gene. Expression of the
transgene was expected to generate very high levels
of β-glucuronidase (GUS) activity, because, after
transcription of the transgene, the resulting viral
RNA would be amplified by the virus’s own replication system. However, disappointingly, all of the
transgenic plants produced extremely low levels of
viral RNA and GUS activity. The plants also showed
an absence of PVX symptoms and were resistant
to PVX infection. The virus-induced silencing effect

Advanced transgenic technology

only worked using replication-competent vectors,
suggesting that the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
intermediate involved in viral replication was the
trigger for silencing (see Box 15.2).
Such is the efficiency with which PVX RNA
can silence homologous genes in the plant genome
that PVX vectors have been used very successfully to
generate functional knockouts in plants (reviewed
by Baulcombe 1999). For example, Burton et al.

315

(2000) described the infection of tobacco plants with
PVX vectors containing a cDNA sequence putatively
encoding a cellulose synthase. The inoculated plants
showed a dwarf phenotype, and levels of cellulose in
affected leaves were reduced by 25%. On the basis of
this evidence, the investigators concluded that the
cDNA did indeed encode such an enzyme and was
capable of cosuppressing the endogenous cellulose
synthase gene.

Box 15.2 Gene silencing
As discussed in the main text, there are several
forms of gene silencing in eukaryotes, which
act in a sequence-specific manner to inhibit
the activity of particular genes or transgenes.
These forms of silencing can occur at either
the transcriptional or post-transcriptional
levels. In the former case, no mRNA is
produced from the affected gene, while in the
latter case transcription is not only permitted,
but is actually necessary for silencing to occur.
Transcriptional silencing reflects the structure
of chromatin, which can form an open
configuration (euchromatin) that is permissive
for gene expression or a closed configuration
(heterochromatin) that represses gene
expression. Post-transcriptional silencing (now
more commonly referred to as RNA silencing)
reflects the activity of particular protein
complexes that target mRNAs with a specific
sequence for destruction. Both forms of
silencing have arisen as mechanisms of
defense against invasive nucleic acids (viruses,
transposons etc.), and both have been
subjugated as mechanisms for gene
regulation. There is extensive cross-talk
between these silencing pathways.
Position-dependent silencing and contextdependent silencing
These forms of transcriptional silencing can
affect single-copy transgenes and are not,
therefore, homology-dependent. Positiondependent silencing occurs where a transgene
integrates into a genomic region containing
heterochromatin. The repressive chromatin

structure and DNA methylation can spread
into the transgenic locus from the flanking
genomic DNA (Matzke & Matzke 1998);
therefore silencing results from a negative
position effect (position effects are discussed in
more detail in Box 12.1). Single-copy
transgenes may also be silenced, even if they
integrate into a genomic region that lacks
negative position effects. For example,
integrated retrovirus vectors often undergo de
novo silencing associated with increased levels
of DNA methylation (Jahner et al. 1982) and,
indeed, this methylation may spread outwards
into flanking host DNA and inactivate linked
genes (Jahner & Jaenisch 1985). Many
unrelated transgenes in animals and plants
have been subject to this type of silencing,
suggesting that a specific sequence is not
responsible. It is possible that eukaryotic
genomes possess mechanisms for scanning
and identifying foreign DNA sequences,
perhaps based on their unusual sequence
context, and then inactivating them by
methylation (Kumpatla et al. 1998).
Prokaryotic DNA may be recognized in this
manner, since prokaryotic sequences act as
a strong trigger for de novo methylation,
e.g. in transgenic mice (Clark et al. 1997).
RNA silencing
All forms of RNA silencing (i.e. PTGS and VIGS
in plants, cosuppression, RNAi, quelling in
fungi) appear to depend in some way or other
on the presence of double-stranded RNA. The
biogenesis of dsRNA can occur in many ways,
continued

316

CHAPTER 15

Box 15.2
e.g. through the deliberate introduction or
expression of complementary RNA molecules
in the cell in RNAi, the production of aberrant
dsRNA from complex transgenes in PTGS,
or the production of viral replication
intermediates in VIGS. Once the dsRNA has
formed, it becomes the substrate of a nuclease
called Dicer, which reduces it to short
duplexes, 21–25 bp in length with overhangs.
These duplexes are known as small interfering
RNAs (siRNAs). They assemble with several
proteins, including one of the Argonaute
family, into an endonucleolytic complex
known as the RNA induced silencing complex
(RISC), which uses one strand of the siRNA to
target complementary mRNAs and cleave
them. The RISC is efficient, resulting in potent
silencing (Tijsterman & Plasterk 2004). In
many organisms (but not mammals) there is
amplification of the siRNA by RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase to increase the potency of
the silencing effect. The siRNA molecules can
also move between cells, explaining why
RNAi and other RNA silencing phenomena
are systemic.
RNA silencing is a form of genomic defense
It is likely that RNA silencing evolved as a
defence against “invasive” nucleic acids
(Yoder et al. 1997, Jones et al. 1998, Jensen
et al. 1999, Li et al. 1999). This has been
supported by the recent isolation of mutants
in several organisms that show deficiencies in
PTGS or RNAi. Animals impaired for RNAi
show increased rates of transposon
mobilization, whereas plants impaired for
PTGS are more susceptible to viral infection.
Interestingly, similar gene products have been
identified in diverse organisms, providing
further evidence for a link between PTGS
and RNAi. A comprehensive discussion of this
exciting new area of research is outside the
scope of this book, but the interested reader
can consult several excellent reviews on the
subject (Plasterk & Ketting 2000, Hammond
et al. 2001).

continued
RNA silencing and gene regulation
Small RNA molecules are also involved in
gene regulation, and the structure of these
endogenous regulators is very similar to that of
the siRNAs produced during RNA interference
experiments. These so-called microRNAs
(miRNAs) are produced not through the
cleavage of longer dsRNA precursors, but are
the direct transcripts of small miRNA genes
that generate hairpin RNA precursors. The
processed miRNAs assemble into a complex
called the miRNP (micro-ribonucleoprotein)
complex, which binds to the 3′ untranslated
regions of target mRNAs and regulates their
translation. Once considered a peculiarity, the
discovery of hundreds of miRNA genes in
eukaryotic genomes (Lim 2003) now suggests
miRNA may be a major form of gene
regulation. Researchers are focusing on
identifying the targets of miRNAs and the
processes they help to regulate. While siRNAs
and miRNAs were once distinguished by their
mechanism (mRNA cleavage or translational
repression), the extensive overlap between the
two pathways now means they are classified
by origin (one from dsRNA produced either
inside or outside the cell, one from
transcription of an endogenous gene). The
chosen pathway appears to depend on the
type of complex involved – siRNAs are
processed by Dicer and assemble into RISCs
which cause cleavage, while at least in animals
miRNAs are also processed by another
enzyme, Drosha, and assemble into miRNPs,
which have a regulatory role. The choice
between these complexes appears to depend
on how perfect the match is between the
complementary strands. Perfect duplexes
generally behave as siRNAs whereas duplexes
with mismatches or bubbles behave as
miRNAs (Bartel 2004, Kim 2005).
Cross-talk between RNA silencing and
transcriptional silencing
The RNA silencing apparatus also has
significant interactions with chromatincontinued

317

Advanced transgenic technology

Box 15.2
modifying proteins, including histonemodifying enzymes and DNA
methyltransferases. Recent evidence has
accumulated that the RNAi machinery can set
epigenetic marks in plants and yeast
(Wassenegger 2005) as well as in Drosophila
and mammalian cells (Matzke & Birchler
2005). Although the mechanisms involved are
complex and yet to be elucidated fully, it
appears that repetitive regions of the genome

continued
such as tandem repeats of transposons (and
perhaps integrated transgenes) can generate
long dsRNA molecules which are processed
into siRNA-like structures known as rasiRNAs
(repeat-associated siRNAs). These are cleaved
by Dicer and form complexes known as RITS
(RNA-induced initiation of transcriptional
silencing), which mediate histone
modification and DNA methylation (Xie et al.
2004).

Direct introduction or aberrant
transgene expression
(a) miRNA pathway

(c) rasiRNA pathway

(b) RNAi pathway

Repetitive elements H3K9-met Swi6

siRNA gene

miRNA gene

Cir4

pol II

pol II?

pol II?

Histone/DNA methylation
Transcriptional silencing
(Ago1 in
fission yeast;
AGO4
in plants)

dsRNA

dsRNA
pri-miRNA
Dicer-like
(DCL1
in plants)

Drosha-DGCR8

tasiRNA (~21nt)

RdRp
(RDR6
in plants)

Dicer-like
(DCL3
in plants)

RdRp
(RDR2
in plants)

tasiRNA (~25nt)
Ago

pre-miRNA

RITS
Exp5-Ran

Tas3
Chp1

NUCLEUS

NPC

NPC

CYTOPLASM

?
pre-miRNA
Dicer
?
miRNA duplex
(~22nt)

miRNA
(single strand)

tasiRNA
(single strand)
Ago

Ago

RISC

miRNP
Partial match

Near perfect match

Target mRNA
Cap
Ago

Target mRNA
(A)n Cap
Ago

Translational repression

(A)n
Ago

mRNA cleavage
(Cytoplasmic RNA)

Fig. B15.1 Current model of small RNA pathways which lead to transcriptional and post-transcriptional silencing.

318

CHAPTER 15

RNA interference is a potent form of silencing
caused by the direct introduction of doublestranded RNA into the cell
RNA interference (RNAi) is a sequence-specific gene
silencing phenomenon caused by the presence of
double-stranded RNA. The process was discovered
by researchers working on gene silencing in the
nematode worm C. elegans, when they observed
that either sense or antisense RNA could suppress
the expression of a homologous gene. It was Fire
et al. (1998) who first showed that the deliberate
introduction of both sense and antisense RNA into
worms at the same time caused a striking and specific
inhibitory effect, which was approximately 10-fold
more efficient than either single RNA strand alone.
They correctly postulated that the silencing effects
seen in the earlier experiments were in fact due to
the presence of contaminating dsRNA. Although
discovered in C. elegans, the principle of RNAi can
be traced back even further, since both cosuppression and virus-induced gene silencing in plants are
thought to involve the production of dsRNA (due to
aberrant transgene expression and viral replication,
respectively).
Initial investigation showed that only a few
molecules of dsRNA were necessary to induce RNAi
in C. elegans, suggesting that like ribozymes, RNAi
is catalytic rather than stoichiometric. Interference
can be achieved only if the dsRNA is homologous
to the exons of a target gene, indicating that it is
a post-transcriptional process. The phenomenon of
RNAi appears to be quite general, and has been
used for gene-silencing experiments in many other
organisms, including Drosophila (Kennerdell &
Carthew 2000), mice (Wianny & Zernicka-Goetz
2000), and plants (Waterhouse et al. 1998, Chuang
& Meyerowitz 2000). Indeed, RNAi is fast becoming the method of choice for large-scale functional
analysis in these organisms due to its simplicity,
specificity, and potency (see for example Hammond
et al. 2001, Hannon 2002). We return to the topic
of large-scale RNAi screens in Chapter 19.
In C. elegans microinjection is the most consistently effective way to induce RNAi. Typically, in
vitro synthesized dsRNA is injected into the germline
of adult worms, and progeny are screened for RNAiinduced phenocopies. However, because RNAi is
a systemic phenomenon, microinjection is not the
only way it can be achieved. Technically simpler
ways to induce RNAi include adding dsRNA to the
worms’ liquid medium, or even feeding the worms
on bacteria that have been engineered to express

dsRNA (Maeda et al. 2001, Fraser et al. 2000). More
recently, transgenic strategies to achieve RNAi have
become popular. The use of a construct containing
adjacent sense and antisense transgenes producing
hairpin RNA (e.g. Chuang & Meyerowitz 2000,
Tavernarakis et al. 2000) or a single transgene
with dual opposing promoters (Wang et al. 2000)
provides a stable source of dsRNA and hence the
potential for permanent gene inactivation.
Until 2001, RNAi was not possible in mammals
due to an unrelated phenomenon called the interferon response, which shuts down protein synthesis
in the presence of dsRNA molecules greater than
30 bp in length and masks any specific effects of gene
silencing. However, as more was learned about the
mechanism of RNAi, a way around this problem was
envisaged. As shown in Box 15.2, RNAi is mediated
by an enzyme called Dicer, which chops the dsRNA
into short fragments, 21 or 22 bp in length with 2-nt
overhangs; these are known as short interfering
RNAs (siRNAs). Two groups independently showed
that chemically synthesized siRNAs transfected into
mammalian cells were capable of inducing specific
RNAi effects without inducing the interferon response
(Elbashir et al. 2001, Caplen et al. 2001), although
as more experiments have been performed, some
examples of the interferon response being induced
by RNAi have been reported (Bridge et al. 2003,
Sledz et al. 2003). Another problem with RNAi
in mammalian cells is that part of the RNAi pathway appears to be missing. In other organisms, but
not in mammals, there is some form of intrinsic
amplification of the triggering RNA which prolongs
the effect and makes it more potent. In C. elegans,
for example, the effect of dsRNA injected into adult
worms can persist in the offspring of the injected
worm! Because of the absence of amplification in
mammalian cells, there has been much interest in
the development of transgenic systems for the expression of siRNA. Conventional strategies for transgene expression cannot be used because the siRNA
genes are so short. Instead, expression cassettes
have been designed which are transcribed by RNA
polymerase III, since this enzyme transcribes the
naturally occurring short RNA genes in mammalian
genomes. In one approach, a plasmid is constructed
which contains two pol III transcription units in
tandem, each producing one of the siRNA strands.
The separate strands are thought to assemble spontaneously into the siRNA duplex in vivo. A second
approach is very similar, but the pol III transcription
units are supplied on separate vectors. The individual
RNA strands assemble in the same manner. In a

319

Advanced transgenic technology

third strategy, the plasmid produces a hairpin RNA
which assembles into siRNA by self-pairing. Either
RNA polymerase II or III can be used to produce
hairpin siRNAs because the transgene is longer.
Because of these developments, many RNAi experiments have now been performed in mammalian
cells (reviewed by Tuschl & Borkhardt 2002, Mittal
2004) and the first reports are beginning to appear
concerning the germline transmission of siRNA transgenes in mice and rats, in some cases mirroring the
equivalent mutant phenotype (Carmell et al. 2003,
Hasuwa et al. 2002, Kunath et al. 2003). Further
experiments have shown how siRNA transfected in
vivo into mouse organs also results in a knockdown
phenotype (McCaffrey et al. 2002). The medical
applications of RNAi are potentially very exciting,
and are discussed in Chapter 26.
RNAi is also being applied in plant biotechnology,
and recent reports discuss several experiments in
which crop plants have been improved using RNAi
transgenes. Examples include using RNAi to overcome genetic redundancy in polyploids (Lawrence
& Pikaard 2003), modifying plant height in rice by
interfering with gibberellin metabolism (Sakamoto
et al. 2003), changing the glutelin content of rice
grains (Kusaba et al. 2003) and the oil content of
cotton seeds (Liu et al. 2002), and controlling the
development of leaves (Palatnik et al. 2003). The
most interesting development is the production of
coffee plants that make decaffeinated coffee by using
RNAi to suppress caffeine biosynthesis (Ogita et al.
2003).

Gene inhibition is also possible at the
protein level
Intracellular antibodies and aptamers bind to
expressed proteins and inhibit their assembly
or activity
Antibodies bind with great specificity to particular
target antigens and have therefore been exploited
in many different ways as selective biochemical
agents. Examples discussed in this book include the
immunological screening of cDNA expression
libraries (Chapter 6), the isolation of recombinant
proteins by immunoaffinity chromatography (Chapter 23), and the development of antibody-based protein chips (Chapter 20). Similarly, oligonucleotides
that bind to proteins – known as aptamers – can be
used as specific capture agents. The microinjection
of antibodies into cells has been widely used to

Heavy chain constant region
Heavy chain variable region
Light chain variable region
Disulfide bond
Flexible peptide linker
IgG

scFv

Fig. 15.10 Comparison of a normal immunoglobulin
molecule with a single-chain Fv fragment.

block the activity of proteins, but the limitation of
this approach is that the inhibitory effect is transient
(reviewed by Morgan & Roth 1988). Specific
inhibitory effects can also be achieved by microinjecting cells with RNA from hybridoma cell lines
(Valle et al. 1982, Burke & Warren 1984). Such
experiments provided the first evidence that nonlymphoid cells can synthesize and assemble functional antibodies.
To achieve long-term inhibition of specific proteins, cells can be transformed with cDNA constructs
that allow the expression of intracellular antibodies (sometimes termed intrabodies) (Richardson
& Marasco 1995). An important consideration
here is that antibodies are large multimeric proteins
with, in addition to antigen binding, various effector
functions that are non-essential for intracellular
protein inhibition. The strategy for expressing intracellular antibodies has been radically simplified
using modified antibody forms, such as single-chain
Fv (scFv) fragments (Fig. 15.10). These comprise the
antigen-binding variable domains of the immunoglobulin heavy and light chains, linked by a flexible
peptide arm. Such fragments retain the specificity
of the parent monoclonal antibody, but are encoded
by a single, relatively small transgene. Further
modifications to the expression construct allow the
antibody to be targeted to particular intracellular
compartments, such as the nucleus, mitochondria,
or cytosol. It should be noted, however, that antibodies are normally folded and assembled in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus
and are generally less stable in cell compartments
outside the secretory pathway.
Due to their long half-life in the ER, intracellular antibodies have been particularly useful for
the inhibition of cell-surface receptors, which pass
through this compartment en route to the plasma
membrane. For example, the cell-surface presentation of functional interleukin-2 (IL2) receptors was
completely abolished in Jurkat cells stably expressing
an anti-IL2Ra scFv fragment in the ER, rendering
these cells insensitive to exogenously applied IL2
(Richardson et al. 1995). More recently, the same

320

CHAPTER 15

result has been achieved using lentivirus vectors
expressing the scFv fragment, demonstrating how
intracellular antibodies can be valuable for gene
therapy (Richardson et al. 1998). Intracellular antibodies have also been used to abolish the activity
of oncogenes (Beerli et al. 1994, Cochet et al. 1998,
Caron de Fromentel et al. 1999) and to confer virus
resistance by inhibiting replication (reviewed by
Rondon & Marasco 1997). Functional antibodies,
both full-sized immunoglobulins and fragments,
can also be expressed in plants. Hiatt et al. (1989)
were the first to demonstrate the expression of plant
recombinant antibodies, dubbed plantibodies, and
subsequent experiments have shown that this strategy can be used, as in animal cells, to combat viral
diseases by targeting specific viral proteins (Conrad
& Fiedler 1998). Antibodies expressed in plants have
also been used to interfere with physiological processes in the plant, e.g. antibodies against abscisic
acid have been used to disrupt signaling by this
hormone in tobacco (Artsaenko et al. 1995). There
also some examples of expressed aptamers (known
as intramers) being used to suppress protein activity
(e.g. Good et al. 1997, Konopka et al. 2000, Thomas
et al. 1997, Shi et al. 1999a). As is the case with siRNAs,
the expression of intramers usually requires a pol III
expression cassette (Famulok & Verma 2002).
Active proteins can be inhibited by dominantnegative mutants in multimeric assemblies
In diploid organisms, most loss-of-function mutations
generate recessive or semidominant (dosage-related)
phenotypes, because the remaining wild-type copy
of the gene provides enough gene product for normal
or near-normal activity. However, some loss-offunction mutations are fully dominant over the
wild-type allele, because the mutant gene product
interferes with the activity of the wild-type protein.
Such mutants are known as dominant negatives, and
principally affect proteins that form dimers or larger
multimeric complexes.
The deliberate overexpression of dominantnegative transgenes can be used to swamp a cell with
mutant forms of a particular protein, causing all
functional molecules to be mopped up into inactive
complexes. The microinjection of DNA constructs
or in vitro-synthesized dominant-negative RNA into
Xenopus embryos has been widely used to examine
the functions of cell-surface receptors in development,
since many of these are dimeric (e.g. see Amaya
et al. 1991, Hemmati-Brivanlou & Melton 1992).

Dominant-negative proteins stably expressed in
mammalian cells have been used predominantly to
study the control of cell growth and proliferation. A
dominant-negative ethylene receptor from Arabidopsis
has been shown to confer ethylene insensitivity in
transgenic tomato and petunia. The effects of transgene expression included delayed fruit ripening and
flower senescence (Wilkinson et al. 1997).

Suggested reading
Albanese C., Hulit J., Sakamaki T. et al. (2002) Recent
advances in inducible expression in transgenic mice.
Seminal Cell Development & Biology 13, 129–41.
Dykxhoorn D.M. & Lieberman J. (2005) The silent revolution: RNA interference as basic biology, research
tool, and therapeutic. Annual Review Medicine 56,
401–23.
Hannon G.J. (2002) RNA interference. Nature 418,
244–51.
Gossen M. & Bujard H. (2002) Studying gene function in eukaryotes by conditional gene inactivation.
Annual Review of Genetics 36, 153–73.
Gunsalus K.C. & Piano F. (2005) RNAi as a tool to study
cell biology: building the genome–phenome bridge.
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 17, 3–8.
Metzger D. & Feil R. (1999) Engineering the mouse
genome by site-specific recombination. Current Opinion
in Biotechnology 10, 470–6.
Muller U. (1999) Ten years of gene targeting: targeted
mouse mutants, from vector design to phenotype
analysis. Mechanical Development 82, 3–21.
Padidam M. (2003) Chemically regulated gene expression in plants. Current Opinion in Plant Biology 6,
169–77.
Ristevski S. (2005) Making better transgenic models
– Conditional, temporal, and spatial approaches.
Molecular Biotechnology 29, 153–63.
Saez E., No D. & West A. (1997) Inducible gene expression in mammalian cells and transgenic mice. Current
Opinion in Biotechnology 8, 608–16.
Srivastava V. & Ow D.W. (2004) Marker-free site-specific
gene integration in plans. Trends in Biotechnology 22,
627–9.
Tijsterman M. & Plasterk R.H.A. (2004) Dicers at RISC:
the mechanism of RNAi. Cell 117, 1–3.
Tuschl T. & Borkhardt A. (2002) Small interfering
RNAs: a revolutionary tool for the analysis of gene
function and gene therapy. Molecular Interventions 2,
158–67.
Voinnet O. (2002) RNA silencing: small RNAs as ubiquitous regulators of gene expression. Current Opinion
in Plant Biology 5, 444–51.
Wang R.H., Zhou X.F. & Wang X.Z. (2003) Chemically
regulated expression systems and their applications
in transgenic plants. Transgenic Research 12, 529–40.

Part III
Genome Analysis, Genomics, and Beyond

CHAPTER 16
The organization and structure of genomes

Introduction
Across the range of cellular organisms there is an
enormous diversity in gene structure. For example,
bacterial genomes consist almost entirely of genes
whereas in higher eukaryotes genes can be small
islands in a large sea of non-coding DNA. Even the
genes themselves can be structurally more complex
as one moves up the evolutionary tree. At the wholegenome level, there are key differences between the
genomes of bacteria, viruses, and organelles on the
one hand and the nuclear genomes of eukaryotes
on the other. Within the eukaryotes there are major
differences in the types of sequences found, the
amounts of DNA, and the number of chromosomes.
The genomes of cellular organisms vary in size
over five orders of magnitude
Because the different cells within a single organism
can be of different ploidy, e.g. germ cells are usu-

ally haploid and somatic cells diploid, genome sizes
always relate to the haploid genome. The size of
the haploid genome also is known as the C-value.
Measured C-values range from 3.5 × 103 bp for the
smallest viruses, e.g. coliphage MS2, to 1011 bp for
some amphibians and plants (Fig. 16.1). The largest
viral genomes are 1−2 × 105 bp and are just a little
smaller than the smallest cellular genomes, those of
some mycoplasmas (5 × 105 bp). Simple unicellular
eukaryotes have a genome size (1−2 × 107 bp) that
is not much larger than that of the largest bacterial
genomes. Primitive multicellular organisms such
as nematodes have a genome size about four times
larger. Not surprisingly, an examination of the
genome sizes of a wide range of organisms has shown
that the minimum C-value found in a particular
phylum is related to the structural and organizational
complexity of the members of that phylum. Thus the
minimum genome size is greater in organisms that
evolutionarily are more complex (Fig. 16.2).
A particularly interesting aspect of the data shown

Flowering plants
Birds
Mammals
Reptiles
Amphibians
Bony fish
Cartilaginous fish
Echinoderms
Crustaceans
Insects

Fig. 16.1 The DNA
content of the haploid
genome of a range of
phyla. The range of
values within a phylum
is indicated by the
shaded area. (Redrawn
from Lewin 1994 by
permission of Oxford
University Press.)

Molluscs
Worms
Fungi
Algae
Bacteria
Mycoplasmas
Viruses
103

104

105

106

107

108

DNA content (bp)

109

1010

1011

324

CHAPTER 16

105

106

107

108

109

1010

Mycoplasmas
Bacteria
Yeasts
Worms, insects
Birds, amphibians
Mammals
Minimum genome size (bp)

Fig. 16.2 The minimum genome size found in a range of
organisms. (Redrawn from Lewin 1994 by permission of
Oxford University Press.)

in Fig. 16.1 is the range of genome sizes found within
each phylum. Within some phyla, e.g. mammals,
there is only a twofold difference between the largest
and smallest C-value. Within others, e.g. insects and
plants, there is a 10- to 100-fold variation in size.
Is there really a 100-fold variation in the number of
genes needed to specify different flowering plants? Are
some plants really more organizationally complex
than humans as these data imply? The resolution of
this apparent C-value paradox was provided by the
analysis of genome complexity using reassociation
kinetics (see Box 16.1). Using this technique it was
shown that genomes consist of unique sequences of
DNA and repeated sequences and that the proportions

Box 16.1 Genome complexity can be analyzed using reassociation kinetics
When double-stranded DNA in solution is
heated, it denatures (“melts”) releasing the
complementary single strands. If the solution
is cooled quickly the DNA remains in a singlestranded state. However, if the solution is
cooled slowly reassociation will occur. In
practice, the optimum temperature for
reassociation is 25°C below the melting
temperature (Tm), that is, the temperature
required to dissociate 50% of the duplex.
Also, the incubation time and the DNA
concentration must be sufficient to permit
an adequate number of collisions so that the
DNA can reassociate. The size of the DNA
fragments affects the rate of reassociation
and is conveniently controlled if the DNA is
sheared to small fragments.
The reassociation of a pair of
complementary sequences results from their
collision and therefore the rate depends on
their concentration. As two strands are
involved the process follows second-order
kinetics. Thus, if C is the concentration of DNA
that is single stranded at time t, then

When the reassociation is half complete, C/C0
= 0.5 and the above equation simplifies to
C0t1/2 =

Thus the greater the C0t1/2 value, the
slower the reaction time at a given DNA
concentration. More important, for a given
DNA concentration the half-period for
reassociation is proportional to the number
of different types of fragments (sequences)
present and thus to the genome size (Britten
& Kohne 1968). This can best be seen from
the data in Table B16.1. Because the rate of
reassociation depends on the concentration
of complementary sequences, the C0t1/2 for
organism B will be 200 times greater than for
organism A.
Experimentally it has been shown that
the rate of reassociation is indeed dependent
on genome size (Fig. B16.1). However, this
proportionality is only true in the absence of
Table B16.1 Comparison of sequence copy number for
two organisms with different genome sizes.

dC
= −kC2
dt
where k is the reassociation rate constant. If C0
is the initial concentration of single-stranded
DNA at time t = 0, integrating the above
equation gives
C
1
=
.
C0
1 + k·C0t

1
.
k

Organism A Organism B
Starting DNA
concentration (C0)
Genome size
No. of copies of
genome per ml
Relative
concentration
(A vs. B)

10 pg ml−1

10 pg ml−1

0.01 pg

2 pg

1000

5

200

1
continued

Calf thymus DNA
(non-repetitive)

E. coli DNA

Phage T4

Phage MS2

Mouse satellite
DNA

continued

Poly U · Poly A

Box 16.1

Nucleotide pairs

Fig. B16.1 Reassociation of
double-stranded nucleic acids
from various sources. (Redrawn
from Lewin 1994 by permission
of Oxford University Press.)

Percentage reassociated

1

101

102

Percentage reassociated (1– C/C0)

Percentage reassociated

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
101
102
C0t (mol × s l–1)

105

106

107

10–6 10–5 10–4 10–3 10–2 10–1
1
101
–1
C0t (mol × s l )

0

10–1

104

108

109

1010

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100

10

10–2

103

103

repeated sequences. When the reassociation
of calf thymus DNA was first studied, kinetic
analysis indicated the presence of two
components (Fig. B16.2). About 40%
of the DNA had a C0t1/2 of 0.03, whereas
the remaining 60% had a C0t1/2 of 3000.
Thus the concentration of DNA sequences
that reassociate rapidly is 100,000 times
the concentration of those sequences that
reassociate slowly. If the slow fraction is
made up of unique sequences, each of which
occurs only once in the calf genome, then
the sequences of the rapid fraction must be
repeated 100,000 times, on average. Thus
the C0t1/2 value can be used to determine the
sequence complexity of a DNA preparation.
A comparative analysis of DNA from different
sources has shown that repetitive DNA occurs

103

104

100

75

50

20

0
10–4

104

Fig. B16.2 The kinetics of reassociation of calf thymus
DNA. Compare the shape of the curve with those shown in
Fig. B16.1.

102

10–3

10–2

10–1

1
C0t

101

102

103

Fast
component

Intermediate
component

Slow
component

Per cent of
genome

25

30

45

C0t1/2

0.0013

1.9

630

Complexity (bp)

340

6.0 × 105

3.0 × 108

Repetition
frequency

500000

350

1

104

Fig. B16.3 The reassociation kinetics of a eukaryotic
DNA sample showing the presence of two types of
repeated DNA. The arrows indicate the C0t1/2 values for
the three components. (Redrawn from Lewin 1994 by
permission of Oxford University Press.)

widely in eukaryotes (Davidson & Britten
1973) and that different types of repeat are
present. In the example shown in Fig. B16.3
a fast-renaturing and an intermediaterenaturing component can be recognized
and are present in different copy numbers
(500,000 and 350, respectively) relative to
the slow component, which is unique or
non-repetitive DNA.

326

CHAPTER 16

Sc
h

izo

sa
cc

ha
Sa rom
cc
ha yce
s
ro
Pl my
ce
as
Ca m
s
en od
or ium
th
ab
Dr dit
os is
op
An hil
op a
he
les
Ci
Ar
on
ab
a
id
op
sis
M
ou
s
Hu e
m
an

50.00%
45.00%
40.00%
35.00%
30.00%
25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%

Fig. 16.3 The proportion of repeated DNA in different
organisms.

Fig. 16.4 The two types of repeated DNA found in
eukaryotes: dispersed repeats (upper part of figure) and
tandem repeats (lower part of figure). The purple boxes
represent the repeated DNA and the thin black lines the rest of
the genome.

of the two vary in different organisms (Fig. 16.3). In
simpler organisms almost all of the DNA consists of
unique sequences and, as we will see later, genes. By
contrast, in higher organisms there can be large
amounts of repetitive DNA. There are two principal
types of repetitive DNA: tandem repeats and dispersed repeats (Fig. 16.4).
In general, the length of the non-repetitive DNA
component tends to increase as we go up the evolutionary tree and reaches a maximum of 2 × 109 bp
in mammals. The fact that many plants and animals
have a much higher C-value reflects the presence of
large amounts of repetitive DNA. Analysis of mRNA
hybridization to DNA shows that most of it anneals
to non-repetitive DNA, i.e. most genes are present in
non-repetitive DNA. Thus genetic complexity is proportional to the content of non-repetitive DNA and
not to genome size. As will become clear in the next
chapter, repetitive DNA confounds the assembly of
a complete sequence of a genome. Therefore, if one
wishes to sequence the genome of a representative
of a particular phylum it would make sense to select
the one with the lowest content of repetitive DNA.
In this context, reference to Fig. 16.1 shows why the
first two plant genomes sequenced were those of
Arabidopsis (125 Mb) and rice (430 Mb).

Increases in genome complexity sometimes
are accompanied by increases in the
complexity of gene structure
In some genes the coding sequence is interrupted by
the presence of non-coding (untranslated) sequences
known as introns. Such genes are known as split
genes and the parts of these genes that are translated
are known as exons. Split genes are rare in prokaryotes (Edgell et al. 2000, Martinez-Arbaca & Toro
2000) although they are commoner in archaebacteria than eubacteria. Split genes are much commoner
in eukaryotes but the number of such genes, and the
number and size of introns per gene, increase with
genome complexity (Fig. 16.5). For example, the
genome of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has over 6000 open reading frames but only
330 introns (Lopez & Seraphin 2000). Those genes
that are split tend to have just one intron and the
longest intron is only 1 kb in size. Introns are much
commoner in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces
cerevisiae (43% of the genes are split) but the introns
still are small. At the opposite end of the scale, one
chicken collagen gene has over 50 exons, the
human dystrophin gene has 78 introns, and the
Dscam gene in Drosophila has over 100 introns.
Furthermore, in these organisms the introns are
much larger than the exons (Fig. 16.6). The dystrophin gene is the most extreme known example of
this: the gene has a size of 2.5 Mb but the coding
sequence is only 14 kb in length. The longest human
intron is 480 kb and this is similar in size to the
smallest bacterial genomes!
In genes that are related by evolution the exons
are of similar size although the genes themselves may
differ greatly in length. This means that the introns
must be in the same position but can be of different
sizes (Fig. 16.6). Furthermore, if a split gene has
been cloned it is possible to sub-clone either the exon
or intron sequences. If these sub-clones are used as
probes in genomic Southern blots, one can determine if these same sequences are present elsewhere
in the genome. Often the exon sequences of one gene
are found to be related to sequences in one or more
other genes. Some examples of such gene families are
given in Table 16.1. Multiple copies of an exon also
may be found in several apparently unrelated genes.
Exons that are shared by several unrelated genes are
likely to encode polypeptide regions (domains) that
endow the disparate proteins with related properties,
e.g. ATP or DNA binding. Some genes appear to be
mosaics that were constructed by patching together

327

The organization and structure of genomes

95%
S. cerevisiae

Per cent

80
60
40
20
0
D. melanogaster

Per cent

30
20

17%

10
0

Per cent

15

Mammals

10
6%
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20 <30 <40 <60 >60

Number of exons

Fig. 16.5 The number of exons in three representative eukaryotes. Uninterrupted genes have only one exon and are totalled in
the left-hand column. (Redrawn from Lewin 1994 by permission of Oxford University Press.)

Plant globin

Leghemoglobin

Myoglobin

Human α-globin

Human β-globin

0

122

334

159

38

76

115

119

99

229

32

68

103

4800

3400

31

105

113

141

31

99

130

850

30

104

50

100

Size of
gene
(bp)

161

143

153

141

146

1098

876

8659

677

1418

150

Number of amino acids

Fig. 16.6 The placement of introns in different members of the globin superfamily. The size of the introns in base pairs is
indicated inside the inverted triangles. Note that the size of each polypeptide and the location of the different introns are relatively
consistent.

328

Gene family

CHAPTER 16

Organism

Approximate no.
of genes

Clustered (L) or
dispersed (D)

Actin

Yeast
Slime mold
Drosophila
Chicken
Human

1
17
6
8–10
20–30

–
L, D
D
D
D

Tubulin

Yeast
Trypanosome
Sea urchin
Mammals

3
30
15
25

D
L
L, D
D

a-Amylase

Mouse
Rat
Barley

3
9
7

L
?
?

b-Globin

Human
Lemur
Mouse
Chicken

6
4
7
4

L
L
L
L

copies of individual exons recruited from different genes, a phenomenon known as exon shuffling.
It should be noted that although there is a strong
correspondence between protein domains and exon
structure, particularly in metazoa, the two are not
always linked.
There is a second degree of complexity emanating
from split genes. After split genes are transcribed the
introns are excised and the exons spliced together
by a complex of snRNA and some 145 different
proteins known as the splicesome. As the number of
introns within a gene increases it is possible for the
pre-mRNA (unspliced messenger) to be spliced in
different ways (Thanaraj et al. 2004). This is known
as alternative splicing and provides a mechanism
for producing a wide variety of proteins from a small
number of genes (see Box 16.2 for some simple
examples). The Drosophila Dscam gene contains 108
exons and alternative splicing theoretically could
generate 38,016 different proteins!
Viruses and bacteria have very simple
genomes
The genomes of viruses and prokaryotes are very
simple structures, although those of viruses show
remarkable diversity (for a review see Dimmock et al.
2001). Most viruses have a single linear or circular
genome but a few, such as reoviruses, bacteriophage

Table 16.1 Some
examples of multigene
families.

φ6, and some plant viruses, have segmented RNA
genomes. For a long time it was believed that all
eubacterial genomes consisted of a single circular
chromosome. However, linear chromosomes have
been found in Borrelia sp., Streptomyces sp., and
Rhodococcus fascians, and mapping suggests that
Coxiella burnetii also has a linear genome. Two chromosomes have been found in a number of bacteria
including Rhodobacter spheroides, Brucella melitensis,
Leptospira interrogans, and Agrobacterium tumefaciens
(Cole & Saint Girons 1994). In the case of Agrobacterium, there is one circular chromosome and
one non-homologous linear chromosome (Goodner
et al. 1999). Linear plasmids have been found in
Borrelia sp. and Streptomyces sp. as well as a number
of bacteria with circular chromosomes (Hinnebush
& Tilley 1993). Borrelia has a very complex plasmid
content with 12 linear molecules and nine circular
molecules (Casjens et al. 2000).
Bacterial genomes lack the centromeres found in
eukaryotic chromosomes although there may be a
partitioning system based on membrane adherence.
Duplication of the genomes is initiated at an origin
of replication and may proceed unidirectionally or
bidirectionally. The structure of the origin of replication, the oriC locus, has been extensively studied in a
range of bacteria and found to consist essentially of
the same group of genes in a nearly identical order
(Cole & Saint Girons 1994). The oriC locus is defined

329

The organization and structure of genomes

Box 16.2 Examples of alternative splicing
Animals produce antibodies
(immunoglobulins) as part of their
defense against microbial infection. These
immunoglobulins are produced in two forms:
a soluble antibody that is secreted and a
S

S

V

Cµ1 Cµ2

V

membrane-bound antibody that helps to
identify the producing cell to other cells of the
immune system. Both forms of the antibody
are produced from the same pre-mRNA
molecule by alternative splicing (Fig. B16.4).
Secreted
Cµ3 Cµ4 C terminus

Cµ1 Cµ2

Secreted
Cµ3 Cµ4 C terminus S

V

M exons

Cµ1 Cµ2

Secreted µ mRNA

Cµ3 Cµ4

M exons

Membrane µ mRNA

Fig. B16.4 Alternative splicing in immunoglobulin synthesis. The top part of the figure shows the structure of a gene for
the µ heavy chain of an IgM immunoglobulin. The exons are shown as boxes and the introns as lines. A pre-mRNA
produced from this gene can be spliced such that the transmembrane anchor region (M exons) either is excluded (secreted
antibody) or included (membrane-bound antibody).

We consider three genes involved in sex
determination in Drosophila: Sxl (sex lethal),
tra (transformer), and dsx (double sex). Each
of these genes produces a pre-mRNA that has
two possible splicing patterns depending on
whether the fly is male or female (Fig. B16.5).
In male flies, splicing results in the production

of inactive Sxl and tra gene products. The dsx
gene product is functional and inactivates the
female-specific genes. In female flies, splicing
produces functional Sxl and tra gene products
and these interact with the dsx gene to alter its
splicing pattern such that inactivation of
female-specific genes does not occur.
Male

Pre-mRNA

Female
Femalespecific
splicing
1 2 45 6 7 8

Default
splicing

Sxl

AAA

1

2

4

5 6 7

8

1 2

AAA

4567 8

Stop
tra
1

3

AAA

4

1

3

4

1

3

AAA

4

&

tra-2

Stop
dsx

AAA
1

2

3

4

1

2

3

AAA
4

5

6

1

AAA

2

3

5

6

AAA

Fig. B16.5 Sex determination in Drosophila mediated by alternative splicing. The pre-mRNAs are shown in the middle of
the figure with the female splicing pattern on top and the male splicing pattern on the bottom. Note that the inclusion of two
exons, number 3 in Sxl and number 2 in tra, produce messengers that have stop codons resulting in the production of
truncated, inactive proteins.

330

CHAPTER 16

as a region harboring the dnaA (DNA initiation) or
gyrB (B subunit of DNA gyrase) genes linked to a
ribosomal RNA operon.
Many bacterial and viral genomes are circular or
can adopt a circular conformation for the purposes
of replication. However, those viral and bacterial
genomes which retain a linear configuration need
a special mechanism to replicate the ends of the
chromosome (see Box 16.3). A number of different
strategies for replicating the ends of linear molecules have been adopted by viruses (see Dimmock
et al. 2001) but in bacteria there are two basic mechanisms (Volff & Altenbuchner 2000). In Borrelia,
the chromosomes have covalently closed hairpin
structures at their termini. Such structures are also
found in Borrelia plasmids, Escherichia coli phage N15,
poxviruses, and linear mitochondrial DNA molecules in the yeasts Williopsis and Pichia. Exactly
how these hairpin structures facilitate replication of
the ends of the molecule is not known. By contrast,
in Streptomyces, the linear molecules have proteins
bound to the 5′ ends of the DNA and such proteins are also found in adenoviruses, and a number
of bacteriophages and fungal and plant mitochondrial plasmids. These terminal proteins probably are
involved in the completion of replication. In addition, Streptomyces linear replicons have palindromic
sequences and inverted repeats at their termini.
The bacterial genomes that have been completely
sequenced have sizes ranging from 0.6 to 9.1 Mb.
The difference in size between the smallest and the
largest is not a result of introns for these are rare
in prokaryotes (Edgell et al. 2000; Martinez-Abarca
& Toro 2000). Nor is it a result of repeated DNA.
Analysis of the kinetics of reassociation of denatured
bacterial DNA did not indicate the presence of repeated DNA in E. coli (Britten & Kohne 1968) and
only small amounts have been detected in all of
the bacterial genomes that have been sequenced.
In both Mycoplasma genitalium (0.58 Mb) and E. coli
(4.6 Mb) about 90% of the genome is dedicated to
protein-coding genes. Therefore the differences in
size reflect the number of genes carried.

molecule of DNA. Because each organelle contains
several copies of the genome and because there
are multiple organelles per cell, organelle DNA constitutes a repetitive sequence. Whereas chloroplast
(ct) DNA falls in the range 120–200 kb, mtDNA
varies enormously in size. In animals it is relatively
small, usually less than 20 kb, but in plants it can
be as big as 2000 kb.
Chloroplast DNA structure is highly conserved
The complete sequence of ctDNA has been reported
for over a dozen plants including the single-celled
protist Euglena (Hallick et al. 1993), a liverwort
(Ohyama et al. 1986), and angiosperms such as
Arabidopsis, spinach, tobacco, and rice (Shinozaki
et al. 1986, Hiratsuka et al. 1989, Sato et al. 1999,
Schmitz-Linneweber et al. 2001). Overall, there is
a remarkable similarity in size and organization
(Fig. 16.7 and Table 16.2). The differences in size
are accounted for by differences in length of introns
and intergenic regions and the number of genes.
A general feature of ctDNA is a 10–24 kb sequence
that is present in two identical copies as an inverted
repeat. The proportion of the genome that is represented by introns can be very high, e.g. in Euglena
it is 38%.
The chloroplast genome encodes 70–90 proteins,
including those involved in photosynthesis, four rRNA
genes, and 30 or more tRNA genes. Chloroplast
mRNAs are translated with the standard genetic
code (cf. mitochondrial mRNA). However, editing

rt
Sho

unique sequenc
e

Inverted
repeats

Organelle DNA is a repetitive sequence
Mitochondria and chloroplasts both possess DNA
genomes that code for all of the RNA species and
some of the proteins involved in the functions of
the organelle. In some lower eukaryotes the mitochondrial (mt) DNA is linear but more usually
organelle genomes take the form of a single circular

Lon
g

Fig. 16.7

e
unique sequenc

Generalized structure of ctDNA.

331

The organization and structure of genomes

Table 16.2 Key
features of chloroplast
DNA.

Feature

Arabidopsis

Spinach

Maize

Inverted repeats
Short unique sequence
Long unique sequence
Length of total genome
Number of genes
rRNA genes
tRNA genes
Protein-encoding genes

26,264 bp
17,780 bp
84,170 bp
154,478 bp
128
4
37
87

25,073 bp
17,860 bp
82,719 bp
150,725 bp
108
4
30
74

22,748 bp
12,536 bp
82,355 bp
140,387 bp
104
4
30
70

events cause the primary structures of several transcripts to deviate from the corresponding genomic
sequences by C to U transitions with a strong bias for
changes at the second codon position (Maier et al.
1995). This editing makes it difficult to convert
chloroplast nucleotide sequences into amino acid
sequences for the corresponding gene products.
Astasia longa is a colorless heterotrophic flagellate
which is closely related to Euglena gracilis. It contains a plastid DNA that is 73 kb in length, about half
the size of the ctDNA from Euglena. Sequencing of
this plastid DNA has shown that all chloroplast genes
for photosynthesis-related proteins, except that encoding the large subunit of ribulose-1, 5-bisphosphate
carboxylase, are missing (Gockel & Hachtel 2000).
Mitochondrial genome architecture varies
enormously, particularly in plants and protists
Mitochondria are found in almost every eukaryotic
organism and their primary function is the generation of ATP by oxidative phosphorylation. They also
contain DNA (mtDNA) that encodes a very limited
number of biochemical functions. In marked contrast to this genetic conservatism, the mitochondrial
genome is characterized by a bewildering diversity
of structures and mechanisms of gene expression
(for review, see Burger et al. 2003). Although most
mtDNA consists of a single DNA molecule of uniform
length, molecules of varying length are found in some
protists (Fig. 16.8). For example, multiple, circular
molecules are found in the fungus Spizellomyces
punctatus and in trypansosomes. Another protist,
Amoebidium parasiticum, has mtDNA consisting of
several distinct types of linear molecules with terminal and sub-terminal repeat motifs. Terminal
repeat motifs also are a feature of the mtDNA of
Tetrahymena.

Tetrahymena mtDNA

Human mtDNA
Spizellomyces mtDNA

Amoebidium mtDNA

10 kbp

Fig. 16.8 Some unusual mtDNA structures found in
protists compared with human mtDNA.

The size of mtDNA in most eukaryotic phyla
ranges from 15–60 kb but there are some notable
exceptions. The mtDNA of the malarial parasite
(Plasmodium spp.) is only 6 kb long while that of rice
(Oryza sativa) is 490 kb and in cucurbit plants it may
have a size of 2 Mb. The number of genes encoded
by mtDNA ranges from five in Plasmodium to 100 in
certain flagellates with the average across eukaryotes being 40–50. Very small mtDNA genomes obviously have a restricted coding capacity but as the
genome size increases the correlation between size
and gene number quickly breaks down. Rather, the
differences in mtDNA genome size mostly reflect
the size of the intergenic regions and their content of
tandem repeats. The mitochondrial genome of most
animals is very compact and has very little intergenic space and no introns.
Introns are a common feature of mtDNA but a
number of unusual gene structures also has been
described. For example, some genes are split into as
many as eight modules that are scrambled through
the genome and located on both strands of the DNA.
Separate transcription of these subgenic modules

332

CHAPTER 16

yields discrete pieces of rRNA that are held together
via base pairing of complementary sequences.

The organization of nuclear DNA in
eukaryotes
The gross anatomy of chromosomes is
revealed by Giemsa staining
In certain eukaryotes, a variety of treatments will
cause chromosomes in dividing cells to appear as a
series of light- and dark-staining bands (Fig. 16.9).
In G-banding, for example, the chromosomes are
subjected to controlled digestion with trypsin before
Giemsa staining, which reveals alternating positively
(dark G-bands) and negatively (R-bands or pale Gbands) staining regions. As many as 2000 light and
dark bands can be seen along some mammalian
chromosomes. An identical banding pattern (Qbanding) can be seen if the Giemsa stain is replaced
with a fluorescent dye such as quinacrine, which
intercalates between the bases of DNA. A structural
basis for metaphase bands has been proposed that
is based on the differential size and packing of DNA
loops and matrix-attachment sites in G- vs. R-bands
(Saitoh & Laemmli 1994). Bands are classified according to their relative location on the short arm (p) or
the long arm (q) of specific chromosomes; e.g. 12q1
means band 1 on the long arm of chromosome 12. If
the chromosome DNA is treated with acid and then
alkali prior to Giemsa staining, then only the centromeric region stains and this is referred to as heterochromatin. The unstained parts of the chromosome
are called euchromatin. Because Giemsa stain shows
preferential binding to DNA rich in AT base pairs, the
Acid then alkali
then Giemsa stain

Giemsa
stain at 60°C
Telomere
G-light
band
G-dark
bands

p (short arm)

Euchromatin

Centromere

Heterochromatin

q (long arm)

dark G-bands should be AT-rich and the light Gbands GC-rich. This has been confirmed by other
methods (Zoubak et al. 1996, Saccone et al. 1999).
CpG islands represent a different form of compositional heterogeneity. They were originally identified
as short regions of mammalian DNA which contained many sites for the restriction endonuclease
HpaII and for this reason originally were called
HpaII Tiny Fragment (HTF) islands. This island DNA
is found in short regions of 1–2 kb, which together
account for approximately 2% of the mammalian
genome. It has distinctive properties when compared with the DNA in the rest of the genome. It is
unmethylated, GC-rich, and does not show any suppression of the dinucleotide CpG. By contrast, bulk
genomic DNA has a GC content which is much lower,
is methylated at CpG, and the CpG dinucleotide is
present at a much lower frequency than would be
predicted from its base composition. CpG islands
have been found at the 5′ ends of all housekeeping
genes and of a large proportion of genes with a
tissue-restricted pattern of expression (Craig &
Bickmore 1994).
Telomeres play a critical role in the
maintenance of chromosomal integrity
The ends of eukaryotic chromosomes are also the
ends of linear duplex DNA and as such require a
special structure to ensure that they are maintained
(see Box 16.3). The reason for this is connected with
the way in which double-stranded DNA is replicated
(Fig. 16.10). DNA synthesis occurs in a 5′ → 3′ direction and is initiated by extension of an RNA primer.
After removal of this primer there is no way of completing the 5′ end of the molecule. In the absence
of a method for completing the ends, chromosomes
would become shorter after each cell division.
Telomeres are specialized nucleic acid sequences
whose role is to protect the ends of chromosomes.
In most eukaryotes the telomere consists of a short
5’ 3’

5’ 3’

Primer
excision

Euchromatin

5’ 3’

5’ 3’

3’ 5’

3’ 5’

Telomere
G-banding

C-banding
5’
3’

Fig. 16.9 Banding patterns revealed on chromosomes
by different staining methods. Note that intercalating
fluorescent dyes produce the same pattern as Giemsa stain
at 60°C. In the C-banding technique some heterochromatin
may be detected at the telomeres.

5’
3’
RNA
primer

5’

3’

3’

5’

Fig. 16.10 Formation of two daughter molecules with
complementary single-stranded 3′ tails after primer excision.

The organization and structure of genomes

333

Box 16.3 Telomerase, immortality, and cancer
Telomeres are found at the ends of
chromosomes and their role is to protect
the ends of chromosomes. They also stop
chromosomes from fusing to each other.
Telomeres consist of repeating units of
TTAGGG that can be up to 15,000 bp
in length. The enzyme telomerase is a
ribonucleoprotein enzyme whose RNA
component binds to the single-stranded
end of the telomere. An associated reverse
transcriptase activity is able to maintain the
length and structure of telomeres by the
mechanism shown in Fig. 16.11.
Telomerase is found in fetal tissues, adult
germ cells, and cancer cells. In normal somatic
cells the activity of telomerase is very low
and each time the cells divide some of the
telomere (25–200 bp) is lost. When the
telomere becomes too short the chromosome
no longer divides and the host cell dies by a
process known as apoptosis. Thus, normal
somatic cells are mortal and in tissue culture
they will undergo 50–60 divisions (Hayflick
limit) before they senesce. In contrast to
mammals, indeterminately growing
multicellular organisms, such as fish and
crustaceae, maintain unlimited growth
potential throughout their entire life and

Table 16.3 Length of the telomere repeat in different
eukaryotic species.

Species
S. cerevisiae
(yeast)
Mouse
Human
Arabidopsis
Cereals
Tobacco

Length of telomere repeat
300 bp
50 kb
10 kb
2–5 kb
12–15 kb
60–160 kb

repeat of TTAGGG many hundreds of units long
but in S. cerevisiae the repeat unit is TG1−3. These
repeats vary considerably in length between species
(Table 16.3) but each species maintains a fixed
average telomere length in its germline.

retain telomerase activity (for a review see
Krupp et al. 2000).
Cancer cells can divide indefinitely in tissue
culture and thus are immortal. Telomerase
has been found in cancer cells at activities
10- to 20-fold greater than in normal cells.
This presence of telomerase confers a selective
growth advantage on cancer cells and allows
them to grow uncontrollably. Telomerase is
an ideal target for chemotherapy because this
enzyme is active in most tumors but inactive
in most normal cells.
If recombinant DNA technology is used
to express telomerase in human somatic
cells maintained in culture, senescence is
avoided and the cells become immortal.
This immortalization usually is accompanied
by an increased expression of the c-myc
oncogene to the levels seen in many cancer
cell lines.
Chromosomal rearrangements involving
telomeres are emerging as an important cause
of human genetic diseases (Knight & Flint
2000). Telomere-specific clones have been
used in combination with fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH, see p. 353) to detect
abnormalities not found by conventional
cytogenetic analysis.

As can be seen from Fig. 16.11, the ends of
telomeres are not blunt-ended but have 3′ singlestranded overhangs of 12 or more nucleotides. The
enzyme telomerase, also called telomere terminal
transferase, is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme whose
RNA component binds to the single-stranded end
of the telomere. An associated reverse transcriptase
activity is able to maintain the length and structure of the telomeres by the mechanism shown in
Fig. 16.11. For a detailed review of the mechanism
of telomere maintenance the reader should consult
the paper by Shore (2001).
Tandemly repeated sequences can be
detected in two ways
Repeated sequences were first discovered 30 years
ago during studies on the behavior of DNA in centrifugal fields. When DNA is centrifuged to equilibrium

334

CHAPTER 16

(a)
(T T A G G G)n T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G 3’
(A A T C C C)n A A T C C C A A T C C C A A T C C C A A 5’

Telomere

(b)
Discontinuous DNA synthesis ('lagging strand')
Replication
fork

(T T A G G G)n T T A G G G T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G 3’
(A A T C C C)n A A T C C C A A

5’

Continuous DNA synthesis ('leading strand')

(c)

Lagging strand cannot be replicated discontinuously
(T T A G G G)n T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G 3’

(A A T C C C)n A A T C C C A A T C C C A A 5’

Leading strand replicated continuously

(d)
(T T A GG G)n T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G 3’
~ C A A UCCC A A UC ~
Telomerase
(T T A GG G)n T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G GG T T A G 3’
~ C A A UCCC A A UC ~

Telomerase
processively extends
3’ end of lagging
strand using its
own RNA as template

Telomerase
(T T A GG G)n T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G GG T T A G GG T T A G 3’
~ C A A UCCC A A UC ~
Telomerase

(e)

Discontinuous synthesis of lagging strand can proceed
(T T A GG G)n T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A G GG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG T T A GGG 3’

Fig. 16.11 Diagram of telomere replication and the role of telomerase. (a) The hexameric repeat sequence found at telomere
ends in human chromosomes. (b) and (c) A replication fork attempting to replicate the telomere. The Okazaki fragment (purple
arrow) allows replication of all but the most terminal portion of the lagging strand. (d) and (e) Telomerase, carrying its own RNA
template (5′-CUAACCCUAAC-3′), extends the lagging strand at the end of the chromosome and allows replication. (Redrawn with
permission from Nussbaum et al. 2001. W.B. Saunders Publishing, 2001, a division of Harcourt.)

in solutions of CsCl, it forms a band at the position
corresponding to its own buoyant density. This in
turn depends on its percentage G + C content:
ρ(density) = 1.660 + 0.00098 (% GC) g cm−3.
When eukaryotic DNA is centrifuged in this way
the bulk of the DNA forms a single, rather broad
band centered on the buoyant density which corresponds to the average G : C content of the genome.
Frequently one or more minor or satellite bands are
seen (Fig. 16.12). The behavior of satellite DNA

on density gradient centrifugation frequently is
anomalous. When the base composition of a satellite
is determined by chemical means it often is different to that predicted from its buoyant density. One
reason is that it is methylated, which changes its
buoyant density.
Once isolated, satellite DNA can be radioactively
labeled in vitro and used as a probe to determine
where on the chromosome it will hybridize. In this
technique, known as in situ hybridization, the
chromosomal DNA is denatured by treating cells
that have been squashed on a cover slip. The

335

The organization and structure of genomes

Main band of DNA

Hf
Hf
359
bp

Hf

Hf

Amount of DNA

Hin fI digest
Electrophoresis

359 bp

Hf
Hf
359
bp

Buoyant density (g/cm3)

Fig. 16.12 Detection of three satellite DNA bands (dark
shading) on equilibrium density gradient centrifugation of
total DNA.

localization of the sites of hybridization is determined
by autoradiography. Using this technique, most of
the labeled satellite DNA is found to hybridize to the
heterochromatin present around the centromeres
and telomeres. Because RNA that is homologous to
satellites is found only rarely the heterochromatic
DNA most probably is non-coding.
When satellite DNA is subjected to restriction
endonuclease digestion only one or a few distinct
low-molecular-weight bands are observed following
electrophoresis. These distinct bands are a tell-tale
sign of tandemly repeated sequences. The reason
(Fig. 16.13) is that if a site for a particular restriction
endonuclease occurs in each repeat of a repetitious
tandem array, then the array is digested to unitsized fragments by that enzyme. After elution of the
DNA band from the gel it can be used for sequence
analysis either directly or after cloning. However,
the sequence obtained is a consensus sequence
and not necessarily the sequence of any particular
repeat unit because sequence divergence can and
does occur very readily. Note that if such sequence
divergence occurs within a restriction endonuclease
cleavage site in the repeated units then digestion
with the enzyme produces multimers of the repeat
unit (“higher order repeats”) (Fig. 16.13).
Tandemly repeated sequences can be
subdivided on the basis of size
The amount of satellite DNA and its sequence
varies widely between species and can be highly

Ha

Hf

Ha

Hf

Hf

Ha

HinfI

Hf

Ha
Hae III

Electrophoresis

359 bp

1077 bp
718 bp
359 bp

Fig. 16.13 Digestion of purified satellite DNA by restriction
endonucleases. The basic repeat unit is 359 bp long and
contains one endonuclease Hinfl (Hf) site. Digestion with
Hinfl converts most of the satellite DNA to a set of 359 bp
long fragments. These are abundant enough to be seen as
a band against the smear of other genomic fragments after
gel electrophoresis and staining with ethidium bromide.
Digestion of the DNA with endonuclease HaeIII (Ha) yields a
ladder of fragments that are multiples of 359 bp in length.
(Redrawn with permission from Singer & Berg 1990.)

polymorphic within a species. Thus, 1–3% of the
rat genome is accounted for by centromeric satellite
DNA whereas it is 8% in the mouse and 23% in the
cow. The length of the satellite repeat unit varies
from the d(AT)n:d(TA)n structure found in the land
crab to complete gene clusters like that encoding
the different species of ribosomal RNA (Fig. 16.14).
Minisatellites are sequences found throughout the
genome whose repeat units are 14–500 bp in
length. They demonstrate intraspecies polymorphism and because of this they were used (Monckton
& Jeffreys 1993, Alford & Caskey 1994) in the
earliest versions of DNA profiling (often referred to
as DNA “fingerprinting”).

336

CHAPTER 16

Transcribed
spacer
Intergenic
spacer

18S

5.8S

2S

28S

Intergenic
spacer

Fig. 16.14 Detailed architecture of a rDNA repeat unit. Transcribed regions are shown in boxes. Coding sequences are shown in
purple and spacer regions in white.

Microsatellite DNA families, also known as simple
sequence repeats (SSRs) or simple sequence length
polymorphisms (SSLPs), are small arrays of tandem
repeats of 1–13 bp that are interspersed throughout
the genome (for review, see Toth et al. 2000). Two
features of microsatellites are worth noting. First they
are inherited in a Mendelian manner (Fig. 16.15)
and so they can be used for checking genetic relationships. Secondly, they are one of the mechanisms
whereby restriction fragment length polymorphisms are generated (Fig. 16.16). The properties of
microsatellites make them ideal for forensic analysis
of materials from scenes of crime (see Box 16.4) as
well as investigations of food authenticity (Woolfe
& Primrose 2004) and animal theft.
Microsatellites comprise 3% of the human genome
with an average density of one SSR per 2 kb of
sequence. Of these SSRs, dinucleotide repeats are
the most common (0.5% of the genome) closely followed by runs of (dA·dT)n at 0.3% of the genome.
Trinucleotide repeats are much rarer. Within the
dinucleotide repeats there is a heavy bias towards
dAC·dTG and dAT·dTA repeats with dGC·dCG being
extremely rare. The significance of these repeats in
normal genes is not known but they can be the locus

for a number of inherited disorders when they
undergo unstable expansion. For example, in fragile
X syndrome patients can exhibit hundreds or even
thousands of the CGG triplet at a particular site,
whereas unaffected individuals only have about 30
repeats. So far, over a dozen examples of disease
resulting from trinucleotide expansion have been
described (Sutherland & Richards 1995, Warren
1996, Mitas 1997, Bowater & Wells 2000). Similar
trinucleotide repeats have been discovered in bacteria (Hancock 1996) and yeast (Dujon 1996, Mar
Alba et al. 1999, Richard et al. 1999) following complete genome sequencing. As in the human case,
perfect trinucleotide repeats in yeast are subject to
polymorphic size variation while imperfect ones are
not. Some pathogenic bacteria use length variation
in simple repeats to change the antigens on their surfaces so that they can evade host immune attack.
Tandem repetition of DNA sequences also occurs
within coding regions. For example, linked groups
of identical or near-identical genes sometimes are
repeated in tandem. These are the gene families described earlier (p. 326). However, tandem repetition
also occurs within a single gene; for example, the
Drosophila “glue” protein gene contains 19 direct

5’- unique sequence GTGTGT . . . . . . .GT unique sequence -3’

(a)

(GT)n
The number n of GT repeats varies among the population

Parents

Fragment length

(b)

1

1
154
150
146
140

2

2

3

4

5

3

4

5

Offspring

Electrophoretic
gel of PCR
products for the
SSLP in (a)

Fig. 16.15 The use of SSLPs in
inheritance studies. (a) Structure
of an SSLP. (b) Schematic
representation of an SSLP in a fivemember family. The two alleles
carried by the father are different
from those carried by the mother.
The children inherit one allele of the
SSLP from each parent. (Redrawn
with permission from Dogget 1992,
courtesy of University Seience
Books.)

337

The organization and structure of genomes

Box 16.4 The forensic application of SSLPs
The existence of SSLPs is of great utility in
paternity testing and criminal investigations,
since they allow ready comparison of DNA
samples in the absence of detailed genetic
information by the generation of a DNA
profile or fingerprint. In principle, a multilocus
DNA fingerprint can be generated either by
the simultaneous application of several
probes, each one specific for a particular
locus, or by applying a single DNA probe that
simultaneously detects several loci. When DNA
profiling was first developed (Jeffreys et al.
1985a), multilocus probes were used and
these were derived from a tandemly repeated
sequence within an intron of the myoglobin
gene. These probes can hybridize to other
autosomal loci – hence their utility. The first
criminal court case to use DNA fingerprinting
was in Bristol, UK, in 1987, when a link was
shown between a burglary and a rape. In the
following year, DNA-fingerprinting evidence
was used in the USA. It is worth noting that
DNA evidence has been used to prove
innocence as well as guilt (Gill & Werrett
1987).
In criminal cases, a major disadvantage of
multilocus probes is the complexity of the
DNA fingerprint provided. Showing innocence
is easy, but proving identity is fraught with
problems. The issue boils down to calculations
of the probability that two profiles match by
chance as opposed to having come from the
same person (Lewontin & Hartl 1991). For this
reason forensic scientists have moved to the
use of single-locus probes and an example is
shown in Fig. B16.6. The latest variation of the
technique targets 13 SSLP loci and makes a
determination of sex (X or Y). For each locus
there are multiple alleles (Table B16.2) and the
frequency of each allele is known for different
ethnic groups. Consequently it is possible to
show that the probability of two individuals
sharing the same profile is less than one in a
billion (thousand million).
Another advantage of single-locus probes is
that it is possible to convert the DNA profile
into a numerical format. This enables a
database to be established and all new profiles

C

A

D

Anorak Swab

D

A

C

4 kb

Fig. B16.6 Use of a single-locus probe to determine the
identity of a rapist. Semen was extracted from an anorak
and a vaginal swab. The victim’s profile is in track D and
that of two suspects in tracks A and C. The profile matches
individual A. (Photo courtesy of Dr. P. Gill.)
Table B16.2 Numbers of alleles for the different SSLPs
used in human DNA profiling.

Locus
D3S1358
VWA
FGA
D8S1179
D21S11
D18S51
D5S818
D13S317
D7S820
D16S539
THO1
TPOX
CSF1PO

Number of alleles
8
11
14
12
22
21
10
8
10
9
7
8
10
continued

338

CHAPTER 16

Box 16.4
can be matched to that database. In many
cases the police have been able to re-open
unsolved murder or rape cases and match
DNA from the scene of the crime with profiles
in the database.
Detection of SSLPs requires that an
adequate amount of DNA be present in the
test sample. This is not a problem in paternity
disputes but can be an issue in forensic testing.

H1

H1

Individual
A

continued
With the advent of single-locus probes, the
amount of DNA required
is much less of an issue, since the test loci in
the sample can be amplified by the PCR. As a
result, it now is possible to type DNA from a
face-mask worn by a bank robber, a cigarettebutt discarded at the scene of a crime or the
back of a stamp on an envelope used to send
a “poison-pen” or blackmail letter.

ples of 9 bp and most of them are 54 or 108 bp long.
This accounts for the observed primary sequence of
collagen, which has glycine in every third position
and a very high content of proline and lysine.
Dispersed repeated sequences are composed
of multiple copies of two types of
transposable elements

Individual
B

Dispersed throughout eukaryotic genomes are
multiple copies of different transposable elements
and hence these elements are dispersed repeated
sequences. In studies on reassociation kinetics
(Box 16.1) these transposable elements are characterized as moderately repetitive DNA. Eukaryotic
transposable elements are divided into two classes
(Fig. 16.17) based on the properties of their transposition intermediate. In class 1 elements the
transposition intermediate is formed from mRNA

Individual
C

Individual
A

Individual
B

Individual
C

Fig. 16.16 Restriction fragment length polymorphisms
caused by a variable number of tandem repeats between the
two Hinfl restriction sites. The upper part of the diagram
shows the DNA structure for three different individuals. The
lower part of the diagram shows the pattern obtained on
electrophoresis of Hinfl cut DNA from the three individuals
after hybridization with a probe complementary to the
sequence shown in pink.

tandem repeats of a sequence 21 base pairs long that
encodes seven amino acids. The repeats are not perfect but show divergence from a consensus sequence.
Another example is the gene for α2(1) collagen found
in chicken, mouse, and humans. The gene comprises
52 exons with introns varying in length from 80 to
2000 bp. However, all the exon sequences are multi-

Classification according to mode of transposition
DNA TRANSPOSON

RETROTRANSPOSON

Cut and paste

Via replicative mechanism

Classification according to autonomy
AUTONOMOUS:
DNA transposons (e.g. Tc1/mariner family)
Non-LTR retrotransposons (e.g. LINEs)
LTR retrotransposons (e.g. Ty/copia/HERV)
NON-AUTONOMOUS:
SINEs (e.g. Alu elements)
Processed pseudogenes

Fig. 16.17 Classification of transposable elements found in
eukaryotes.

339

The organization and structure of genomes

encoded by the element. Since these elements
resemble retroviruses they are usually referred to
as retrotransposons. In class 2 elements the transposition intermediate is the transposon DNA. Both
classes of transposon can be subdivided into autonomous and non-autonomous elements. Autonomous elements encode the gene products required
for transposition. Non-autonomous elements have
no significant coding capacity but retain the DNA
sequences necessary for transposition. Integration of
transposons generally results in the duplication of a
short genomic sequence at the site of insertion but
the size and sequence of these duplications vary
among the various transposon families.
Retrotransposons can be divided into
two groups on the basis of transposition
mechanism and structure
The LTR group of retrotransposons has long terminal repeats (LTRs) in direct orientation at both
ends (Fig. 16.18). If they are autonomous they
contain at least two genes: the gag gene encodes a
capsid-like protein and the pol gene encodes a polyprotein with protease, reverse transcriptase, RNase
H, and integrase activities. The non-autonomous

(a)

PBS

PPT
gag

prot

env
RT

(b)

elements lack most or all of the gag and pol genes
and can be variable in size. Examples of LTR retrotransposons are the Ty1–Ty5 elements of yeast and
the copia and gypsy elements originally found in
Drosophila. The Ty1/copia and Ty3/gypsy families have
been found in all animal, plant, and fungal species
that have been examined but their organization
and distribution show extensive variation. There is
no relationship between the total copy number and
the host genome size, and the copy number can vary
widely between closely related species within a genus
(Kumar 1996). Up to 7% of the human genome is
composed of endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) that
resemble LTR retrotransposons (Fig. 16.18). Most of
these HERVs have accumulated nonsense mutations
and no longer encode functional retroviral proteins
(Smit 1999).
Non-LTR retrotransposons are divided into long
interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs) and short
interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs). LINEs encode
three proteins: ORF1, a gag-like protein; an endonuclease; and reverse transcriptase. Both LINEs and
SINEs terminate by a simple sequence repeat, usually poly(A). A well-studied group of SINEs is the Alu
family that is found in Old World primates (Batzer &
Deininger 2002). This family is named for an AluI

RNase H

endo

PBS

PPT
gag
prot

endo

RT

RNase H

(c)
gag

RT

RNase H

(TAA)n

LTR
IR
DR

Fig. 16.18 Major types of retroelements. Overall organization of (a) a retrovirus, the avian leukosis virus; (b) a retrotransposon,
the yeast Ty1 element; and (c) a non-LTR (long terminal repeat) retrotransposon, the Drosophila I factor. Open reading frames are
depicted by purple boxes. The gag gene encodes structural proteins of the virion core, including a nucleic-acid-binding protein; the
env gene encodes a structural envelope protein, necessary for cell-to-cell movement; prot, protease involved in cleavage of primary
translation products; RT, reverse transcriptase; RNase H, ribonuclease; endo, endonuclease necessary for integration in the host
genome; LTR, long terminal repeats containing signals for initiation and termination of transcription, and bordered by short
inverted repeats (IRs) typically terminating in 5′–TG . . . CA–3′; PBS, primer binding site, complementary to the 3′ end of a host
tRNA, and used for synthesis of the first (–) DNA strand; PPT, polypurine tract used for synthesis of the second (+) DNA strand; DR,
short direct repeats of the host target DNA, created upon insertion. (Reprinted from Grandbastien 1992 by permission of Elsevier
Science.)

340

CHAPTER 16

Left monomer

Right monomer
mid Arich

poly(A)like
282bp Alu element

Fig. 16.19 Structure of a typical 282-bp Alu element flanked by direct repeats (purple arrows). The Alu element itself consists
of an inexact duplication of two monomer units separated by a mid A-rich region. The right monomer contains an additional
sequence of approximately 30 bp (dark green) that is absent from the left monomer. The consensus sequence usually is followed
by an A-rich region resembling a poly(A) tail.

restriction endonuclease site typical of the sequence.
Alu elements are 280-nucleotide sequences that lack
introns (Fig. 16.19) and there are at least 1 million of
them in the human genome. They are transcribed
but not translated because they lack an open reading
frame.
DNA transposons are simpler than
retrotransposons
DNA transposons have terminal inverted repeats
and target site duplications of conserved length.
Autonomous DNA transposons have a single gene
that encodes a transposase responsible for cutting
and pasting the transposon to new locations. Nonautonomous DNA transposons usually are derived
from autonomous transposons by deletion. The bestknown DNA transposons are the Tc1/mariner superfamily and the non-autonomous MITES (miniature
inverted-repeat transposable elements).
Helitrons are a new group of class 2 transposons
that have been found in plants, nematodes, flies, fish,
and fungi (Kapitonov & Jurka 2001, Poulter et al.
2003). They replicate via a rolling-circle mechanism
(see p. 193) and encode a replicase and a helicase.
Some helitrons, called helentrons, also encode an
endonuclease similar to that found in LINEs.
Transposon activity is highly variable across
eukaryotes
Eukaryotic genomes contain substantially differing
amounts of repetitive DNA (Table 16.4) because of
differential propagation and deletion of transposons.
The distribution of transposable elements in the
human genome is quite different to that in the fruit
fly, nematode, and Arabidopsis genomes. First, the
euchromatic portion of the human genome has a
much higher density of transposable element copies.
Second, the human genome is filled with copies of
ancient transposons whereas the transposons in
other organisms, particularly the fruit fly, are of

more recent origin. This probably reflects the efficiency of housecleaning through genomic deletion.
Thirdly, two repeat families (LINE1 and Alu) account
for 60% of all interspersed repeat sequences in the
human genome but the other genomes studied
contain many different transposon families. Similarly DNA transposons represent only 6% of all
interspersed repeats in humans but 25, 49, and
87% in the fruit fly, Arabidopsis, and the nematode,
respectively.
Genome analyses have shown that even closely
related lineages can experience radically different
rates of transposition (Eichler & Sankoff 2003). For
example, retrotransposition among great-ape species
has slowed to a crawl when compared with that
of Old World monkeys and differential rates of
SINE and LINE retrotransposition are believed to be
responsible for the increased genome size of primates
compared with other mammals. The wide range
of genome sizes found in cereals (420–16,000 Mb)
is due to a high level of transposition activity with
transposons inserting into transposons. So extensive
is transposon amplification that counterbalancing
deletion mechanisms (e.g. illegitimate recombination)
are required to prevent genetic obesity.
Repeated DNA is non-randomly distributed
within genomes
Replication of transposons depends on selecting a
favorable chromosomal site for integration of their
genomic DNA. Different retroelements meet this challenge by targeting distinctive chromosomal regions
(Bushman 2003). Within mouse and human DNA,
L1 LINEs preferentially associate with gene-poor ATrich regions whereas Alu SINEs accumulate within
GC-rich (gene-rich) areas. Similarly, among cereal
genomes, LTR retrotransposons are found mostly in
intergenic regions whereas MITEs are found within
low-copy genic sequences. Among other eukaryotes
where repeats constitute less than 10% of the
genome, repeats accumulate within heterochromatic

341

The organization and structure of genomes

Organism

Table 16.4
Frequency of repeated
DNA in different
genomes.

Human
Mouse
Mosquito
Mustard weed
Sea squirt
Pufferfish
Baker’s yeast
Fruitfly
Fission yeast
Nematode

Species

% repeat DNA in genome

Homo sapiens
Mus musculus
Anopheles gambiae
Arabidopsis thaliana
Ciona intestinales
Takifugu rubripes
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Drosophila melanogaster
Schizosaccharomyces pombe
Caenorhabditis elegans

46
38
16
14
10
<10
2.4
2
0.35
<1

regions and are found infrequently in euchromatin.
Within an organism there can be tremendous variation in the distribution of repeat sequences. Some
regions of the human genome are extraordinarily
dense in repeats whereas others are nearly devoid of
repeats. For example, a 525-kb region on chromosome Xp11 has an overall transposable element
density of 89% and includes a 200 kb segment with
a density of 98%. By contrast, the density in the
four homeobox clusters is less than 2%.

reshaping genomes. For example, bursts of retrotransposon activity have resulted in a doubling of the
maize genome (SanMiguel et al. 1998). Particularly
interesting is the observation of Kalendar et al.
(2000) that the copy number of an LTR transposon
(BARE-1) varies almost threefold among nearby
wild barley populations subjected to different levels
of water stress.

Eukaryotic genomes are very plastic

Pseudogenes are sequences of genomic DNA with
such similarity to normal genes that they are
regarded as non-functional copies or close relatives
of genes. They are formed in two ways. Classical
duplicated pseudogenes are formed when genes that
are tandemly duplicated accumulate mutations
such that one of the genes becomes non-functional.
These mutations may prevent transcription and/or
translation. Processed pseudogenes are formed by the
accumulation of mutations in a gene that has been
retrotransposed to a new location. They are characterized by an absence of introns that are present in
the parental gene indicating that cDNA synthesis
was involved in their formation.

Genomic DNA is often thought of as the stable template of heredity, largely dormant and unchanging,
apart from the occasional point mutation. Nothing
could be further from the truth. DNA is dynamic
and is constantly subjected to rearrangements,
insertions, and deletions as a result of the activity of
transposable elements. For example, LINE insertions
have been found to be responsible for certain cases
of hemophilia, thalassemia, Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, and chronic granulomatous disease. A
particularly striking example is a LINE insertion in
the APC gene of adenocarcinoma cells from a colon
cancer patient, but not in the surrounding normal
tissue (Miki et al. 1992). In addition to duplicating themselves, LINEs can carry with them genomic
flanking sequences that are downstream from their
3′-untranslated regions and could have a role in
exon shuffling (see Box 16.5). SINEs may be hot-spots
for recombination and a number of examples have
been identified in human genetic disorders (the reader
interested in this topic should consult the review of
Luning Prak & Kazazian 2000).
In plants there are a number of classic studies
showing that transposons are responsible for

Pseudogenes are derived from repeated DNA

Segmental duplications are very large,
low-copy-number repeats
Segmental duplications are 1–200 kb blocks of
genomic DNA with >90% identity that are found at
two or several locations in the genome. In mammalian DNA, the pericentromeric and subtelomeric
regions of chromosomes are filled with segmental
duplications but the amount varies between species.
For example, segmental duplications in the mouse,
rat, and in humans account for 1.5%, 3%, and

342

CHAPTER 16

Box 16.5 Exon shuffling mediated by a LINE

5.5% respectively of total DNA. Segmental duplications are much less common in the Saccharomyces,
nematode, and fruitfly genomes. By contrast, 24
segmental duplications account for 58% of the
genome of Arabidopsis but only one of them is in the
centromeric region.
Segmental duplications can be divided into two
categories: interchromosomal and intrachromosomal
duplications. The former are defined as segments
that are duplicated among non-homologous chromosomes. For example, a 9.5 kb genomic segment
from the human adrenoleukodystrophy locus from
Xq28 has been duplicated to regions near the centromeres of chromosomes 2, 10, 16, and 22. Intrachromosomal duplications occur within a particular
chromosome or chromosomal arm. This category
includes several duplicated segments, also known as
low copy repeat sequences, which mediate recurrent
chromosomal structural rearrangements associated

Gene X
Exon 1

2

3

L1

4
pA

Transcription

pA
An

L1 expression

Translation

Exon 1

2

3
n

Gene Y

A

Moran et al. (1999) were able to demonstrate
in cultured cells the transduction of a gene by
a long interspersed nuclear element (LINE).
A neomycin (neo) reporter gene was placed
downstream from a LINE sequence and both
the promoter and the initiation codon of the
neo gene were replaced with a 3′ splice site.
The only way that this modified neo gene
could be expressed after transduction was if it
was inserted into an actively transcribed gene
and spliced onto the transcript derived from
that gene. Such events were readily detected
and characterized as authentic LINE insertions
in several genes.
The above result suggests a simple
mechanism by which exons can be shuffled
in the human genome (see Fig. B16.7).
Transcription of a LINE element within
a gene X fails to terminate at its own
weak polyadenylation (poly(A)) signal
but terminates instead at the poly(A) signal
of the gene. The reverse transcriptase and
endonuclease encoded by this transcript
bind to the poly(A) tail and insert a cDNA
copy into gene Y. This step results in the
transduction of gene X into gene Y thereby
creating a new gene.

pA
L1 retrotransposition

1

2

4

3

pA
Transcription

pA

An
Splicing
An

Fig. B16.7 Possible mechanism for LINE involvement in
exon shuffling. L1, LINE element; pA, polyadenylation
signal; An, poly(A) tail. Reverse transcriptase and
endonuclease are shown in gray. (Reprinted from
Eickbush 1999 by permission of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.)

with genetic disease in humans. For example, on
chromosome 17 there are three copies of a 200 kb
repeat separated by 5 Mb of sequence and two copies
of a 24 kb repeat separated by 1.5 Mb of sequence.
These sequences are so similar that they can undergo
recombination (for a review of this topic the reader
should consult Eichler 2001).
The human Y chromosome has an unusual
structure
The Y chromosome has attracted special interest from
geneticists and evolutionary biologists because of its
distinctive role in mammalian sex determination. It,
and the other sex chromosome (X), originated a few
hundred million years ago from the same ancestral
autosome. The two then diverged in sequence such
that today only relatively short regions at either
end of the Y chromosome are homologous to the

343

The organization and structure of genomes

corresponding regions of the X chromosome. The
remaining 95% of the modern-day Y chromosome
is male-specific and is designated as MSY (malespecific region of Y). The MSY region is a mosaic
of heterochromatic sequences and three classes of
euchromatic sequences: X-transposed, X-degenerate,
and ampliconic (Skaletsky et al. 2003).
About 15% of the MSY consists of X-transposed
sequences and they are still 99% identical to

(a)

their X-chromosome counterparts. These sequences
are dominated by a high proportion of dispersed
repetitive sequences and contain only two genes. A
further 20% of the MSY consists of X-degenerate
sequences that are more distantly related to the X
chromosome and has higher gene content than
X-transposed sequences (Fig. 16.20). The remainder
of MSY consists of a web of Y-specific repetitive
sequences (amplicons) that make up a series of

Male-specific region
Yp

Yq

(b)
cen
1 Mb

(c)

X-transposed

Ampliconic

Pseudoautosomal

X-degenerate

Heterochromatic

Other

X-transposed

X-degenerate

Ampliconic

10
5

Coding genes
Other transcription units
All transcription units
Pseudogenes

Coding genes
Other transcription units
All transcription units
Pseudogenes

Coding genes
Other transcription units
All transcription units
Pseudogenes

Alu
Retroviral
LINE1
All repeats

Alu
Retroviral
LINE1
All repeats

Alu
Retroviral
LINE1
All repeats

Data not
available
Coding genes
Other transcription units
All transcription units
Pseudogenes

0

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Alu
Retroviral
LINE1
All repeats

Nucleotides in
interspersed repeats (%)

(d)

Euchromatic
genome

15

Alu
Retroviral
LINE1
All repeats

Number per Mb

20

Euchromatic
MSY

Fig. 16.20 The male-specific region of the Y chromosome. (a) Schematic representation of the whole chromosome, including
the pseudoautosomal and heterochromatic regions. (b) Enlarged view of a 24-Mb portion of the MSY, extending from the proximal
boundary of the Yp pseudoautosomal region to the proximal boundary of the large heterochromatic region of Yq. Shown are
three classes of euchromatic sequences, as well as heterochromatic sequences. A 1-Mb bar indicates the scale of the diagram.
(c), (d), Gene, pseudogene, and interspersed repeat content of three euchromatic sequence classes. (c) Densities (numbers per Mb)
of coding genes, non-coding transcription units, total transcription units, and pseudogenes. (d) Percentages of nucleotides
contained in Alu, retroviral, LINE1, and total interspersed repeats. Redrawn from Skaletsky et al., with permission from Nature.

344

CHAPTER 16

palindromes. These palindromes come in a range of
sizes, up to 3 Mb in length, with the two arms of the
palindrome having 99.9% identity. The ampliconic
DNA has the highest gene content and a very high
pseudogene content compared with the rest of the
MSY (Fig. 16.20).
Centromeres are filled with tandem repeats
and retroelements

Summary of structural elements of eukaryotic
chromosomes

During mitosis, the key chromosomal element
responsible for directing operations is the centromere and its associated kinetochore complex. Most
organisms have monocentric chromosomes. That
is, the centromere is located at a single point on
the chromosome. A few species, such as the sedge
Luzula and the nematode C. elegans, have holocentric
chromosomes in which the microtubules attach
throughout the length of the chromosome.
In contrast to telomeres (see p. 334), centromeres
are not specified by highly conserved sequences.
In the budding yeast S. cerevisiae the centromere is
precisely defined and only 125 bp is needed to mediate spindle attachment. By contrast, in the fission
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe the centromere is
40–120 kb in size and in humans it has a size of
3 Mb. In S. pombe, the three centromeres consist of a
core sequence flanked by inverted repeats, which in
turn are flanked by tandem and dispersed repeats.
Centromeres of Drosophila consist of different types
of satellite DNA, containing embedded transposable elements along with islands of unique sequence
DNA. A key component of mammalian centromeres

Heterochromatin

Euchromatin

Tandemly
repeated
DNA
Introns, exons and
other unique sequences
interspersed with LINEs
and SINEs plus microand minisatellite DNA

Heterochromatin

Tandemly
repeated
sequences
(satellite
DNA)

is alphoid DNA, which consists of a 171 bp motif
repeated in a tandem head-to-tail fashion and then
organized into higher order repeat arrays. In plants,
Arabidopsis has a similar centromere structure to
humans but the tandem repeats are 178 bp in length
while cereal centromeres contain up to 200 copies
of a gypsy-like retroelement called cereba.

The different structural elements that have been
discussed in the previous section are summarized
in Fig. 16.21. A key feature of eukaryotic DNA is
that as the genome size increases so too does the
amount of repeated DNA, and hence the density
of coding sequences must decrease. This has been
confirmed by the data on gene density derived from
the different DNA sequencing projects (Table 16.5).
However, no generalizations can be made about
the frequency of the different types of repeated
DNA (tandem repeats, transposons, pseudogenes,
segmental duplications) in different organisms or
even within the chromosomes of the same organism.
By contrast, as a general rule of thumb, the average
number of introns per gene, and their size, increase
as one moves up the evolutionary tree.
From a practical point of view, repeated sequences
are a major source of problems. During genomic
cloning experiments, recombination can occur
between repeats and this can cause scrambling of
DNA sequences. Even if no scrambling occurs,
mistakes can occur during the synthesis phase of

Euchromatin

Heterochromatin

Tandemly
repeated
DNA
Introns, exons and
other unique
sequences interspersed
with LINEs and SINEs
plus micro- and
minisatellite DNA

Fig. 16.21 The location of
repeated sequences within a
typical human chromosome.

The organization and structure of genomes

Table 16.5 Average gene density in different
organisms.

Organism
Bacteria
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Plasmodium (malarial parasite)
Caenorhabditis elegans
(nematode)
Arabidopsis thaliana
Fugu (puffer fish)
Ciona (sea squirt)
Drosophila
Human

Gene density
(genes/Mb)
800–1100
446
221
196
175
150
97
71
20

345

This paper describes the amazing diversity of mitochondrial
genomes that is found, particularly in the eukaryotic
protists.
Feschotte C., Jiang N. & Wessler S.R. (2002) Plant transposable elements: where genetics meets genomics.
Nature Reviews Genetics 3, 329–41.
A refreshing look at plant transposon elements.
Jobling M.A. & Gill P. (2004) Encoded evidence: DNA in
forensic analysis. Nature Reviews Genetics 5, 739–51.
An excellent review of the principles and the issues of DNA
profiling.
Kwok P.-Y. & Chen X. (2003) Detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms. Current Issues in Molecular
Biology 5, 43–60.
This review covers the infinite ways of detecting SNPs.
Sharpless N.E. & DePinho R.A. (2004) Telomeres,
stem cells, senescence, and cancer. Journal of Clinical
Investigation 113, 160–8.
This review provides a detailed analysis of the significance of
telomerase in cancer.

DNA sequencing and the commonest is polymerase
slippage on microsatellites. Finally, during data
assembly repeats can lead to incorrect assembly of
genomic fragments.

Skaletsky H., Kuroda-Kawaguchi T., Minx P.J., et al.
(2003) The male-specific region of the Y chromosome is a mosaic of discrete sequence classes. Nature
423, 825–37.
This paper provides the first clear insight to the structure of
the Y chromosome and is destined to become a classic.

Suggested reading

Stankiewicz P. & Lupski J.R. (2002) Genomic architecture, rearrangements and genomic disorders. Trends
in Genetics 18, 74–82.
Although focused on the role of structural rearrangements
on genetic disease this review is well worth reading.

Shapiro J.A. & van Steinberg R. (2005) Why repetitive DNA is essential to genome function. Biological
Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 80,
227–50.
Eichler E.E. & Sankoff D. (2003) Structural dynamics
of eukaryotic chromosome evolution. Science 301,
793–7.
These two papers present detailed analyses of the role of
repeated DNA in the evolution of genomes.
Burger G., Gray M.W. & Lang B.F. (2003) Mitochondrial genomes: anything goes. Trends in Genetics 19,
709–16.

Useful websites
Each year, the January 1 issue of Nucleic Acids Research
has short reviews of many of the different molecular
biology and genomics databases and has links to the
associated websites. These reviews can be accessed via
http://www.nar.oupjournals.org/content/

CHAPTER 17
Mapping and sequencing genomes

Introduction
Genetics is the study of the inheritance of traits from
one generation to another. As such, it examines the
phenotypes of the offspring of sexual crosses. Useful
as these data may be, they cannot provide an explanation for the biological basis for a phenotype for that
requires biochemical information. In the first half
of this book we described the different techniques
of gene manipulation and gene analysis, and their
application has greatly facilitated our understanding
of the biology of different phenotypes. For example,
cloned genes can be sequenced and this provides
data on the amino acid sequence of the gene product.
A search of databases can provide information on
gene function and this function can be confirmed
by overexpressing the gene product, purifying it,
and then undertaking biochemical characterization.
Finally, the gene can be subjected to site-directed
mutagenesis and the phenotype of the variants
determined by reintroducing them to their natural
host cells.
Although the techniques of gene manipulation are
exceedingly powerful they often are not sufficient to
understand phenotypes. For example, before many
genes can be cloned they need to be mapped close to
a convenient marker. While this may be easy in an
organism such as Drosophila where many mutants
are available, it is much more difficult in humans
or in organisms whose genetics have been poorly
studied. What are required are methods to generate
high-density chromosome maps quickly and easily.
There is another reason why such high-density
maps are required. Biologists who once were content
to investigate simple biochemical pathways or phenomena now want to know how all the components
of an organism are produced and interact and how
they evolved. Also, they want to investigate the “big”
themes in biology. For example, how did speech
and memory evolve, what changes occurred as the
primates evolved, etc. Investigating these issues
requires knowledge of the entire genome sequence

of the organisms of interest and whole-genome
sequencing is greatly facilitated if there are highdensity maps.
Why do high-density maps facilitate whole-genome
sequencing? The explanation is simple. The largest
stretch of DNA that can be sequenced by the Sanger
method (p. 126) in a single pass is 600–800 nucleotides and many of the genomes to be sequenced
are over 1 million times larger. Therefore, it is necessary to break each genome into much smaller pieces
for sequencing and then join the pieces together
again. However, joining the pieces together requires
markers because two fragments can only be shown
to overlap if they have unique sequences (i.e. no
repeated sequences) in common. For most organisms
of interest the density of genetic markers is woefully
inadequate and this has led to the development of
physical markers.
The first physical map of an organism made
use of restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLPs)
Botstein et al. (1980) were the first to recognize that
DNA probes could be used to identify polymorphic
sequences and their initial target was restriction
fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs). These RFLPs
are generated in various ways:
1 loss of an endonuclease cleavage site, most probably as a result of a base change (Fig. 17.1);
2 by insertion or deletion of a stretch of DNA;
3 by variation in the number of repeats of a microsatellite (p. 336 et seq.).
To generate an RFLP map the probes must be highly
informative. This means that the locus must not
only be polymorphic, it must be very polymorphic. If
enough individuals are studied, any randomly selected
probe will eventually discover a polymorphism.
However, a polymorphism in which one allele exists
in 99.9% of the population and the other in 0.1% is

347

Mapping and sequencing genomes

(a)
Restriction sites
Normal

Affected

Probe

(b)

Direction
of DNA
migration

Fig. 17.1 Example of a RFLP
and its use for gene mapping.
(a) A polymorphic restriction site is
present in the DNA close to the gene
of interest. In the example shown,
the polymorphic site is present in
normal individuals but absent in
affected individuals. (b) Use of the
probe shown in Southern blotting
experiments with DNA from
parents and progeny for the
detection of affected offspring.

Heterozygous
parents

of little utility because it seldom will be informative.
Thus, as a general rule, the RFLPs used to construct
the genetic map should have two, or perhaps three,
alleles with equivalent frequencies.
The first RFLP map of an entire genome (Fig. 17.2)
was that described for the human genome by DonisKeller et al. (1987). They tested 1680 clones from a
phage library of human genomic DNA to see whether
they detected RFLPs by hybridization to Southern
blots of DNA from five unrelated individuals. DNA
from each individual was digested with 6–9 restriction enzymes. Over 500 probes were identified that
detected variable banding patterns indicative of
polymorphism. From this collection, a subset of 180
probes detecting the highest degree of polymorphism
was selected for inheritance studies in 21 threegeneration human families (Fig. 17.3). Additional
probes were generated from chromosome-specific
libraries such that ultimately 393 RFLPs were selected.
The various loci were arranged into linkage groups
representing the 23 human chromosomes by a
combination of mathematical linkage analysis and
physical location of selected clones. The latter was
achieved by hybridizing probes to panels of rodent–
human hybrid cells containing varying human
chromosomal complements (see p. 359). RFLP maps
have not been restricted to the human genome. For

Affected
offspring

Heterozygous
offspring

Normal
offspring

Heterozygous
parents

Parents

Offspring

Fig. 17.2 The first RFLP genetic linkage map of the entire
human genome. (Reproduced from Donis-Keller et al. 1987,
with permission from Elsevier Science.)

348

CHAPTER 17

22

12

22
12

more informative polymorphic markers and other
mapping techniques.

23

23

Sequence tags are more convenient markers
than RFLPs because they do not use Southern
blotting

23 22 22 23 22 12 23 12

–1

The concept of sequence-tagged sites (STSs) was
developed by Olson et al. (1986) in an attempt to
systematize landmarking of the human genome.
Basically, an STS is a short region of DNA about
200–300 bases long whose exact sequence is found
nowhere else in the genome. Two or more clones
containing the same STS must overlap and the
overlap must include the STS.
Any clone that can be sequenced may be used
as an STS provided it contains a unique sequence.
A better method to develop STS markers is to create
a chromosome-specific library in phage M13. Random M13 clones are selected and 200–400 bases
sequenced. The sequence data generated are compared with all known repeated sequences to help
identify regions likely to be unique. Two PCR primer
sequences are selected from the unique regions which
are separated by 100–300 bp and whose melting
temperatures are similar (Fig. 17.4). Once identified,
the primers are synthesized and used to PCR amplify
genomic DNA from the target organism and the
amplification products analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis. A functional STS marker will amplify
a single target region of the genome and produce
a single band on an electrophoretic gel at a position corresponding to the size of the target region
(Fig. 17.5). Alternatively, an STS marker can be used
as a hybridization probe.

–2
–3

Fig. 17.3 Inheritance of a RFLP in three generations of a
family. The RFLP probe detects a single locus on human
chromosome 5. In the family shown, three alleles are detected
by Southern blotting after digestion with Taq1. For each of the
parents it can be inferred which allele was inherited from the
grandmother and which from the grandfather. For each child
the grandparental origin of the two alleles can then be
inferred. (Redrawn from Donis-Keller et al. 1987, with
permission from Elsevier Science.)

example, RFLP maps have been published for most of
the major crops (see for example Moore et al. 1995).
The human genome map produced by Donis-Keller
et al. (1987) was a landmark publication. However,
it identified RFLP loci with an average spacing of
10 centimorgans (cM). That is, the loci had a 10%
chance of recombining at meiosis. Given that the
human genome is 4000 cM in length, the distance
between the RFLPs is 10 Mb on average. This is
too great to be of use for gene isolation. However, if
the methodology of Donis-Keller et al. (1987) was
used to construct a 1 cM map, then 100 times the
effort would be required! This is because 10 times
as many probes would be required and 10 times
more families studied. The solution has been to use

Primer A
5
51

5 ’ – GA A T T CC TGA

C C T C A GG T G A

T C T GCCCGCC

T CGGC C T C C C

A A A G T GC T GG

G A T T T A C A GG

C A T G A GGC A C

C A C A C C T GGC

C AG T T GC T T A

GC T C T C T A AG
AGA A C A T T CG

101

T C T T A T T T GC

T T T ACT T ACA

A A A T GG A G A T

ACA ACC T T A T

151

ACA T A T ACT A

GG T T T C C A T G

A A C AGC AGCC

AGA T C T CA AC

T A T A T A GGG A

201

CCAGTGAGA A

ACCA A TGT CA

GG T A GC T G A T

G A T GGGC A A a

GG g A T GGG g A

251

C T GA T A T GCC

c NNNNNG A C G

A T T CGAG T GA

C A AGC T A C T A

TGT ACC T CAC

301

CT T T t CA TCT

t GA T C T T CAC

C A C C C A T GG g

T A GG T G T C A C

TGA A a T T – 3 ’

3’ – C T AGA AGTG

G T GGG T A C C C

AT–5 ’

Primer B

Primer A
Primer B

5 ’ –GT T

T CC

A TG

AAC

AGC

AGT

CAG– 3 ’

5 ’ – TAC

CCA

T GG

GTG

GTG

A AG

AGC – 3 ’

Melting
temperature
69.4°C
68.7°C

Fig. 17.4 Example of a sequence-tagged site (STS). The STS developed from the sequence shown is 171 bases long. It starts at
base 162 and runs through base 332. Primer A is 21 bases long and lies on the sequenced strand. Primer B is also 21 bases long
and is complementary to the shaded sequence towards the 3′ end of the sequenced strand. Note that the melting temperatures of
the two primers are almost equal. (Reproduced with permission from Dogget 1992, courtesy of University Science Books.)

Mapping and sequencing genomes

PCR products for 12 STSs
Fragment
length

C 1 2 3 4 5 6 C 7 8 9 10 11 12 C

615
492
369
246
123

349

albumin. While this may or may not be a problem
in constructing a physical map, it is problematical
in the construction of a genetic map.
If it is desirable to select a single representative sequence from each unique gene, then this is
accomplished by focusing on 3′ untranslated regions
(3′ UTRs) of mRNAs. This can be achieved using
oligo(dT) primers if the mRNA has a poly(A) tail.
Two advantages of using the 3′ UTRs are that they
rarely contain introns and they usually display
less sequence conservation than do coding regions
(Makalowski et al. 1996). The former feature leads to
PCR product sizes that are small enough to amplify.
The latter feature makes it easier to discriminate
among gene family members that are very similar
in their coding regions.

Electrophoretic gel

Fig. 17.5 Confirmation that an STS is a unique sequence
on the genome. Note that the 12 STSs from chromosome
16 shown above appear as single bands after amplification
and hybridization to a chromosome 16 genomic library.
(Reproduced with permission from Dogget 1992, courtesy
of University Science Books.)

In organisms with large amounts of repetitive DNA
the generation of an appropriate sequence, and confirmation that it is an STS, can be time consuming. Adams et al. (1991) suggested an alternative
approach. The principle of their method is based on
the observation that spliced mRNA contains sequences
that are largely free of repetitive DNA. Thus partial
cDNA sequences, termed expressed sequence tags
(ESTs), can serve the same purpose as the random
genomic STSs but have the added advantage of
pointing directly to an expressed gene. In a test of
this concept, partial DNA sequencing was conducted
on 600 randomly selected human cDNA clones
to generate ESTs. Of the sequences generated, 337
represented new genes, including 48 with similarity
to genes from other organisms, and 36 matched previously sequenced human nuclear genes. Forty-six
ESTs were mapped to chromosomes.
In practice, there are a number of operational considerations associated with the use of ESTs. First,
they need to be very short to ensure that the two ends
of the sequence are contiguous in the genome, i.e.
are not separated by an intron. Secondly, large genes
may be represented by multiple ESTs which may
correspond to different portions of a transcript or
various alternatively spliced transcripts. For example,
one of the major databases holds over 1300 different EST sequences for a single gene product, serum

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are
the most favored physical marker
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced
“snips”) are single base-pair positions in genomic
DNA at which different sequence alternatives (alleles)
exist in a population (Fig. 17.6). In highly outbred
populations, such as humans, polymorphisms are
considered to be SNPs only if the least abundant
allele has a frequency of 1% or more. This is to distinguish SNPs from very rare mutations. In practice,
the term SNP is typically used more loosely than
required by the above definition. For example, single
base variants in cDNAs (cSNPs) are usually classed
as SNPs because most of these will reflect underlying genomic DNA variants although they could
result from RNA editing. Single base-pair insertions
or deletions (indels) also are considered to be SNPs
by some workers. A special subset of SNPs is one
where the base change alters the sensitivity of a
sequence to cleavage by a restriction endonuclease.
These are known as restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLPs, see p. 347) or “snip-SNPs”.
Another important subset is one in which the two
alleles can be distinguished by the presence or
absence of a particular phenotype. Good examples
here are emphysema in humans, caused by a C > T
change in the gene for α1-antitrypsin, and sickle cell
anemia. In the latter case, an A > T change results in
the replacement of a glutamine residue in β-globin
by a valine residue but also destroys an MstII site
thereby generating an RFLP.
SNPs probably are the most important sequence
markers for physical mapping of genomes. The
reason for this is that they have the potential to

350

CHAPTER 17

(a)
A CG T T CGG A T
T GC A A GC C T A

A CG T C CGG A T
T GC A GGC C T A

(b)

A C G T A C GG A T
T GC A T GC C T A

MstII

A CG T GCGG A T
T GC A CGC C T A

MstII

MstII
β-globin gene

Fig. 17.6 Examples of single
nucleotide polymorphisms. (a)
Three possible SNP variants of a
T/A base pair. (b) A single base
change in the β-globin gene that
destroys a restriction site for
endonuclease MstII (CC/TNAGG)
thereby generating a restriction
fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP). This base change results
in amino acid residue 6 being
changed from glutamate to valine
and is the cause of sickle cell
disease.

Pro Glu Glu
C C T G A GG A G
GG A C T C C T C

C C T G T GG A G
GG A C A C C T C
Pro

Val

Glu

provide the greatest density of markers. For example,
their frequency is estimated to be 1 per 1000 base
pairs which, in the case of the human genome, means
3 million in total. Originally the Human SNP Consortium planned to map 300,000 of them (Masood
1999) but the latest version of the SNP database

(dbSNP) contains 10 million (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
SNP/).
Given their importance, many different methods
for detecting SNPs have been developed (Table 17.1;
for reviews see Kristensen et al. 2001, Twyman
2004, Kwok & Chen 2003). SNP detection can be

Table 17.1 Different methods for detecting SNPs.

Approach

Examples

Reference

Enzymatic

Restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP)
Amplified fragment length polymorphisms (AFLP)
Cleavase fragment length polymorphisms (CFLP)
Ligation-based assays
Randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
Direct termination PCR (DT-PCR)

See text (p. 347)
See text (p. 352)
Sander et al. (1999)
Favis et al. (2000)
See text (p. 351)
Chen & Hebert (1998)

Electrophoretic

Single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
Heteroduplex analysis (CGGE, TGGE, DGGE)
DNA sequencing

Nataraj et al. (1999)
See text (p. 351)
See chapter 8

Solid phase

Oligonucleotide arrays

See text (p. 136)

Chromatographic

Denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC)

See text (p. 351)

Physical

Differential sequencing with mass spectrometry
Fluorescence exchange-based methods

Graber et al. (1999)
Marras et al. (1999)

In silico

Examining EST data

See text (p. 349)

351

Mapping and sequencing genomes

divided into two different activities: scanning DNA
sequences for previously unknown polymorphisms
to facilitate mapping, and screening (genotyping) of
individuals for known polymorphisms (see p. 355).
Scanning for new SNPs can be further divided into
the global or random approach and the regional or
targeted approach. The latter relies almost totally
on direct sequencing or on denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC).
The technique of dHPLC takes advantage of the
fact that denaturation of ds DNA is highly dependent
on its sequence. Even a single nucleotide difference between two DNA molecules can alter their
melting characteristics sufficiently for them to be
distinguished. Several techniques for the detection
of mutations are based on the differences in mobility
of partially denatured molecules and include constant gradient gel electrophoresis (CGGE), denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE). Instead
of electrophoresis as a detection step, the partially
heat denatured DNA can be analyzed using HPLC
matrices (Arnold et al. 1999, Cho et al. 1999).
The advantage of dHPLC is that analysis is rapid
(~5 minutes per sample) and can be automated
through the use of an autosampler.
Polymorphic DNA can be detected in the
absence of sequence information
Polymorphic DNA can be detected by amplification
in the absence of the target DNA sequence information used to generate STSs. Williams et al. (1990)
have described a simple process, distinct from the
standard PCR, which is based on the amplification
of genomic DNA with single primers of arbitrary
nucleotide sequence. The nucleotide sequence of
each primer was chosen within the constraints that
the primer was nine or 10 nucleotides in length,
between 50 and 80% G + C in composition and
contained no palindromes. Not all the sequences
amplified in this way are polymorphic but those
that are (randomly amplified polymorphic DNA,
RAPD) are easily identified. RAPDs are widely used
by plant molecular biologists (Reiter et al. 1992,
Tingey & Del Tufo 1993) to construct maps because
they provide very large numbers of markers and are
very easy to detect by agarose gel electrophoresis.
However, they have two disadvantages. First, the
amplification of a specific sequence is sensitive to
PCR conditions, including template concentration,
and hence it can be difficult to correlate results

obtained by different research groups. For this
reason, RAPDs may be converted to STSs after isolation (Kurata et al. 1994). A second limitation of the
RAPD method is that usually it cannot distinguish
heterozygotes from one of the two homozygous
genotypes. Nevertheless, Postlethwait et al. (1994)
have used RAPDs to develop a genetic linkage map
of the zebrafish (Danio rerio).
A different method for detecting polymorphisms,
which is not subject to the problems exhibited by
RAPDs, has been described by Konieczny and Ausubel
(1993). In this method, STSs are derived from genes
that have already been mapped and sequenced.
Where possible the primers used are chosen such
that the PCR products include introns to maximize the
possibility of finding polymorphisms. The primary
PCR products are subjected to digestion with a panel
of restriction endonucleases until a polymorphism is
detected. Such markers are called cleaved amplified
polymorphic sequences (CAPS). The way in which
CAPS are detected is shown in Fig. 17.7. Note that
whereas RFLPs are well suited to mapping newly
cloned DNA sequences, they are not convenient to
use for mapping genes, such as plant genes, which

A/A
R

R

B/B
R

R R

A/B
R

R R

PCR + digestion with R + gel electrophoresis

*
*

Fig. 17.7 Generation and visualization of CAPS markers.
Unique-sequence primers are used to amplify a mapped
DNA sequence for two different homozygous strains (A/A
and B/B) and from the heterozygote A/B. The amplified
fragments from strains A/A and B/B contain two and three
recognition sites, respectively, for endonuclease R. In the case
of the heterozygote A/B, two different PCR products will be
obtained, one of which is cleaved twice and the other three
times. After fractionation by agarose gel electrophoresis
the PCR products from the three strains give readily
distinguishable patterns. The asterisks indicate bands that
will appear as doublets. (Redrawn with permission from
Konieczny & Ausubel 1993.)

352

CHAPTER 17

are first identified by mutation. CAPS are much more
useful in this respect.

Genomic
DNA
5’

AFLPs resemble RFLPs and can be detected in
the absence of sequence information
Amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) is
a diagnostic fingerprinting technique that detects
genomic restriction fragments and in that respect
resembles the RFLP technique (Voss et al. 1995).
The major difference is that PCR amplification rather
than Southern blotting is used for the detection
of restriction fragments. The resemblance to the
RFLP technique was the basis for choosing the name
AFLP. However, the name AFLP should not be
used as an acronym because the technique detects
presence or absence of restriction fragments and not
length differences. The AFLP approach is particularly
powerful because it requires no previous sequence
characterization of the target genome. For this reason
it has been widely adopted by plant geneticists. It
also has been used with bacterial and viral genomes
(Voss et al. 1995). It has not proved useful in mapping animal genomes because it is dependent on the
presence of high rates of substitutional variation in
the DNA; RFLPs are much more common in plant
genomes compared to animal genomes.
The AFLP technique is based on the amplification
of subsets of genomic restriction fragments using
the PCR (Fig. 17.8). To prepare an AFLP template,
genomic DNA is isolated and digested simultaneously with two restriction endonucleases, EcoRI
and MseI. The former has a 6-bp recognition site and
the latter a 4-bp recognition site. When used together
these enzymes generate small DNA fragments that
will amplify well and are in the optimal size range
(<1 kb) for separation on denaturing polyacrylamide
gels. Following heat inactivation of the restriction
enzymes the genomic DNA fragments are ligated to
EcoRI and MseI adaptors to generate template DNA
for amplification. These common adapter sequences
flanking variable genomic DNA sequences serve as
primer binding sites on the restriction fragments.
Using this strategy it is possible to amplify many
DNA fragments without having prior sequence
knowledge.
The PCR is performed in two consecutive reactions.
In the first pre-amplification reaction, genomic fragments are amplified with AFLP primers each having
one selective nucleotide (see Fig. 17.8). The PCR
products of the pre-amplification reaction are diluted
and used as a template for the selective amplification

GAAT T C

TT AA

CT T AAG

AAT T

5’

Digestion with
EcoRI and MseI

AAT T C

T

G

AAT
5’ T A

T T A A 5’
EcoRI
adaptor

Mse I
adaptor

AAT TC

T TA

T T A AG

AAT

Add first
primer with
one selective
nucleotide
5

A
AA T TCN

NT T A

T T A AGN
Add second
primer with
three selective
nucleotides
5’

NA A T
C

AAC
AAT T CT
T T A A GA

5’

Pre-selective
amplification
CT T A
GAAT
AAC

5

Selective
amplification
AAT T CT T G

A A CT T A

T T A A GA A C

T T GAAT

Gel electrophoresis

Fig. 17.8 Principle of the amplified fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP) method (see text for details).

using two new AFLP primers which have two or
three selective nucleotides. In addition, the EcoRI
selective primer is radiolabeled. After the selective
amplification the PCR products are separated on a
gel and the resulting DNA fingerprint detected by
autoradiography.
The AFLP technique will generate fingerprints
of any DNA regardless of the origin or complexity.
The number of amplified fragments is controlled
by the cleavage frequency of the rare cutter enzyme
and the number of selective bases. In addition, the
number of amplified bands may be controlled by the
nature of the selective bases. Selective extension with
rare di- or trinucleotides will result in a reduction of
the number of amplified fragments.
The AFLP technique is not simply a fingerprinting
technique; rather, it is an enabling technology that
can bridge the gap between genetic and physical
maps. Most AFLP fragments correspond to unique
positions on the genome and hence can be exploited

Mapping and sequencing genomes

as landmarks. In higher plants AFLPs may be the
most effective way of generating high-density maps.
The AFLP markers also can be used to detect corresponding genomic clones. Finally, the technique can
be used for fingerprinting cloned DNA segments.
By using no or few selective nucleotides, restriction
fragment fingerprints will be produced which subsequently can be used to line up individual clones
and make contigs.
Physical markers can be placed on a
cytogenetic map using in situ hybridization
There are a number of different kinds of genome maps,
e.g. cytogenetic, linkage, physical, etc. The classic
cytogenetic map gives visual reality to other maps
and to the chromosome itself. Because it does not
rely on the cloning of DNA fragments it avoids the
pitfalls that this procedure can introduce, particularly with YACs (see p. 213). Genetic linkage mapping
allows the localization of inherited markers relative to each other. As with cytogenetic maps, linkage
maps examine chromosomes as they are in cells.
Although the methodology used to construct cytogenetic and linkage maps can lead to errors, they
nevertheless are used as gold standards against which
the physical maps are judged. The importance of in
situ hybridization is that it enables this comparison
to be made. Providing hybridization of repeated
sequences is suppressed and provided no DNA
chimeras are present, a cloned fragment or restriction fragment should anneal to a single location
on the cytogenetic map. Furthermore, the physical
map order should match that found by in situ hybridization. Where genetic markers have been located
on the cytogenetic map by in situ hybridization they
also can be positioned on the physical map.
Originally, in situ hybridization of unique sequences
utilized radioactively labeled probes and it was a
technique which required a great deal of technical
dexterity. Today, the methods used are all derivatives of the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
method developed by Pinkel et al. (1986). In this
technique, the DNA probe is labeled by addition of
a reporter molecule. The probe is hybridized to a
preparation of metaphase chromosomes which has
been air-dried on a microscope slide and in which the
DNA has been denatured with formamide. Following hybridization, and washing to remove excess
probe, the chromosome preparation is incubated in a
solution containing a fluorescently labeled affinity
molecule which binds to the reporter on the hybri-

353

dized probe. The preparation is then examined with
a fluorescence microscope. If large DNA probes are
used, they will contain many repetitive sequences
which will bind indiscriminately to the target. This
non-specific binding can be eliminated by competitive suppression hybridization. Before the main
hybridization the probe is mixed with an aqueous
solution of unlabeled total genomic DNA. This
saturates the repetitive elements in the probe so that
they no longer interfere with the in situ hybridization of the unique sequences.
Conventional FISH has a resolving power of ~1 Mb.
If a higher resolution is necessary then less condensed
chromosomes need to be used as the target. Highly
elongated metaphase chromosomes have been prepared by mechanically stretching them by cytocentrifugation. This results in chromosomes that are
5–20 times their normal length. Laan et al. (1995)
have shown that these stretched chromosomes are
excellent for fast and reliable ordering of clones that
are separated by at least 200 kb. They also can be
used to establish the centromere–telomere orientation of a clone. The disadvantages of the method are
that it cannot be used to generate reliable measurements of the distances between signals nor can it be
used to localize unknown sequences on a chromosome. This is because the stretching of individual
chromosomes is highly variable.
In interphase nuclei the chromatin is less condensed than in metaphase chromosomes and hence
provides a good target for high resolution FISH
(Trask et al. 1989, Yokota et al. 1995). The resolution of FISH can be further improved by loosening
the organization of the interphase chromatin using
concentrated salt, alkali, or detergent treatment of
the cell preparations (Parra & Windle 1993). These
techniques, which are commonly referred to as
fiber-FISH, provide a resolution that permits the
detection of a probe to a single fiber. Theoretically,
the resolution of fiber-FISH is the same as the resolving power of the light microscope, i.e. 0.34 mm. This
is equivalent to 1 kb and has been achieved by
Florijn et al. (1995).
Padlock probes allow different alleles to be
examined simultaneously
Another variation on multicolor FISH is the use of
padlock probes (Nilsson et al. 1997). Padlock probes
are oligonucleotides that can be ligated to form a
circle if they bind to a sequence of exact complementarity. The lateral arms of the oligonucleotide

354

CHAPTER 17

(b)

(a)
P

Template DNA

P
B

PCR

5’

Padlock
probe

5’ 3’
T
A

3’

Ligation
P

Matched DNA
or RNA target

B

P
5’

5’ 3’
T
G

Ligation

Padlock
probe
3’
Mismatched
DNA or RNA
target

Separation
5’ 3’
T

(c)
P

Fig. 17.9 The use of padlock probes to detect SNPs. (a) Synthesis of padlock probes by PCR. The 5′ ends of the PCR primers (dark
purple and light purple) define the two target complementary sequences of the padlock probe to be constructed. One primer has a
5′ phosphate (P) to permit ligation whereas the other has a 5′ biotin (B) which is used to remove this strand by capture on a solid
support. Black dots denote labeled nucleotides incorporated during PCR. (b) Hybridization of a padlock probe (black and gray) to a
target DNA sequence (purple). The padlock probe can be converted to a circle by a ligase (left) but ligation is inhibited if the ends of
the probe are mismatched to their target and the probe remains linear (right). (c) Direct detection of a reacted probe catenated to a
target sequence. (Reprinted from Baner et al. 2001 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

twist around the DNA target forming a double
helix and their termini are designed to juxtapose so
that they may be ligated enzymatically. Nilsson et al.
(1997) used two different oligonucleotide probes,
each corresponding to a different sequence variant
of a centromeric alpha-satellite repeat, and differing
by only a single base pair. The closure of the two
alternative padlocked probes occurred only when
there was perfect sequence recognition (Fig. 17.9).
By labeling the two probes with different fluorescent
dyes it was possible to monitor the two sequence
variants simultaneously. Antson et al. (2000) have
extended the use of padlock probes to the detection
of SNPs in single-copy sequences although methods
for signal amplification were required, and more
recently the method has been adapted for highthroughput genotyping (see Box 17.1).
Physical mapping is limited by the
cloning process
The starting point for the construction of a physical
map is the fragmentation of genomic DNA followed
by cloning of all the resulting fragments. Any fragments that share a unique marker, e.g. an STS, must
overlap and can be joined to form a contig. Although
this map-building process is conceptually simple it
is not without its problems. For example, regions
recalcitrant to cloning lead to uncloseable gaps.
Distortions also are created when cloned DNA under-

goes rearrangement or deletion or when unlinked
fragments get co-ligated during the cloning process.
As noted earlier, such distortions can be detected
by in situ hybridization but it would be more satisfactory if they could be avoided altogether. The
only way that this can be achieved is to avoid the
cloning process by mapping DNA directly. Three
methods of doing this have been developed: optical
mapping, radiation hybrid mapping, and HAPPY
mapping.
Optical mapping is undertaken on single
DNA molecules
Optical mapping involves the imaging of single DNA
molecules during restriction enzyme digestion. In the
original method described by Schwartz et al. (1993),
fluid flow is used to stretch out fluorescently stained
DNA molecules dissolved in molten agarose along
with a restriction enzyme. When the agarose gels the
molecules are fixed in place and cutting of the DNA is
triggered by the diffusion of magnesium ions into the
gelled mixture. Fluorescence microscopy is used to
visualize the cleavage sites, which appear as gaps
between bright condensed pools of DNA on the fragment end flanking the cut site.
Since the original description of optical mapping
many different methodological improvements have
been introduced (Aston et al. 1999), two of which
deserve mention here. First, in the original method

355

Mapping and sequencing genomes

Box 17.1 High-throughput genotyping using padlock probes
The major genetic difference between the
individuals in an outbreeding population is
SNPs. While the majority of the SNPs are of
no biological consequence, a fraction of the
substitutions have functional significance
and are the basis for the diversity observed.
For example, in humans there are about
3.2 million SNP differences between any
two individuals of which a small proportion
will be responsible for the variation in physical
features, disease susceptibility, drug response
etc. Not susrprisingly, drug companies and the
medical profession are very interested in being
able to determine the SNP profile of each
individual that they treat so that they can
optimize drug selection (personalized
medicine). This in turn demands the

availability of methods for large-scale
genotyping.
Most of the methods used for SNP
detection involve the use of the PCR and
each PCR reaction requires the use of two
primers. If one tries to analyze 1000 or 10,000
SNP loci simultaneously then this will involve
the use of the same number of primer pairs.
Unfortunately, once more than a few primer
pairs are involved, cross-reactions become an
unmanageable problem. To circumvent this
problem, Hardenbol et al. (2003) developed a
method based on padlock probes that requires
only a single pair of primers for PCR
amplification.
The probes used to detect each SNP
consist of seven segments (Fig. B17.1a). At

(a) 5’
F

H1

P1

X1

P2

Tag

5’

P2

Tag

X1

H2

H1

X2

H2

P1

3’

3’

(b)
(2) Gap fill – polymerization

(1) Anneal

Probe

Genomic
C G G A G A T G G C C C A
G C C T C T A C C G G G T

(3) Gap fill – ligation

C G G A G A T G G C C C A
G C C T C T A C C G G G T

(4) Exonuclease selection

C G G A G A T G G C C C A
G C C T C T A C C G G G T

Fig. B17.1 The use of
molecular inversion
probes for highthroughput
genotyping. Redrawn
from Hardenbohl et al.,
with permission from
Nature.

(5) Probe release

(6) Amplification

continued

356

CHAPTER 17

Box 17.1
the termini of the probes there are two regions
of homology (H1, H2) that are unique for
each SNP and these are identified by a unique
detection tag sequence. Each probe also has
two common primer binding sites (P1, P2)
and two common cleavage sites (X1, X2).
The way in which these probes are used is
shown in Fig. B17.1b. A mixture of genomic
DNA, 1000 or more probes and thermostable
ligase and DNA polymerase is prepared in
quadruplicate and incubated at a temperature
that favors annealing. The sequences
homologous to each SNP hybridize to their
complementary sequences in the genome,
creating a circular conformation with a single
nucleotide gap between the termini of each
probe. Unlabeled dATP, dCTP, dGTP, and
dTTP respectively is added to each of the
four reactions. In reactions where the
added nucleotide is complementary to the
single-base gap, DNA polymerase adds the
nucleotide and DNA ligase closes the gap.

the mass of each restriction fragment was determined from fluorescence intensity and apparent
length. These fragment masses were reported as a
fraction of the total clone size and later converted to
kilobases by independent measure of clone masses
(i.e. cloning vector sequence). Additionally, maps
derived from ensembles of identical sequences were
averaged to construct final maps. Lai et al. (1999)
simplified the sizing of fragments by mixing bacteriophage λ DNA with the test sample. After digestion
these provide internal size standards (Fig. 17.10).
They can also be used to monitor the efficiency of
enzyme digestion. Secondly, the method has been
automated and map-construction algorithms have
been developed thereby increasing the power of
the method (Giacolone et al. 2000). More recently,
the method has been improved by trapping the
DNA in a microfluidic device rather than in agarose
( Jendrejeck et al. 2003).
The accuracy of optical mapping has been determined by comparing the optical maps of E. coli
and Deinococcus radiodurans with the restriction
maps generated by analysis of the complete DNA
sequences of these genomes. In both cases the error
rate was less than 1% (Lin et al. 1999a). The power

continued
This results in a covalently closed circular
molecule that encircles the genomic strand
(i.e. a padlock) to which it is hybridized.
Exonuclease is added and this removes
any probe that has not been circularized.
Before the padlock probes can be amplified
they need to be released from the genomic
DNA. This is done by adding the enzyme
uracil-N-glycosylase, which depurinates the
uracil residues incorporated in the cleavage
site X1. Upon heating, strand scission occurs
at the abasic site and this releases the probe
from the genomic DNA. In the process, the
probe has been molecularly inverted and the
primer binding sites now are at the ends of the
molecule thereby enabling PCR amplification.
After the amplification step, the presence or
absence of each probe in the dATP, dCTP,
dGTP, and dTTP reaction mixes is determined
by hybridization to matching microarrays.
To improve hybridization, the probes are
reduced in size by cleavage at X2.

of optical mapping has been demonstrated by its
use in the development of maps for the genome of the
malarial parasite (Plasmodium falciparum) and the
DAZ locus of the human genome (Lai et al. 1999,
Giacolone et al. 2000). The original plan for the
sequencing of the 24.6 Mb malarial genome was
to separate the 14 chromosomes by pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) (see p. 17) and then construct
and map chromosome-specific libraries. There are
two problems with this approach. First, chromosomes
5–9 are unseparable by PFGE and migrate as a blob.
Secondly, the malarial genome is AT-rich and this
presents problems for reliable library construction.
By using optical mapping, ordered restriction maps
for the enzymes BamHI and NheI were derived from
unfractionated P. falciparum DNA and assembled into
14 contigs corresponding to the chromosomes. A
schematic of the method used is shown in Fig. 17.10.
The construction of accurate physical maps and the
generation of accurate sequence data are very difficult
when clones have a high content of repetitive DNA. A
good example is the DAZ locus which maps to the
q arm of the human Y chromosome. Prior to optical
mapping, our knowledge of the structure of the DAZ
locus was sketchy but by optical mapping of 16

Mapping and sequencing genomes

357

Fig. 17.10 Schematic representation of optical mapping. (Reprinted from Z. Lai et al. 1999 by permission of Nature Publishing
Group, New York.)

358

CHAPTER 17

2.4kb repeats

Exons
E8-11

E1

E7

2.4kb repeats

E1

E2-6

E2-6

E7

DAZ 2

DAZ 1
nnxbb

nnxnb
LINE

Restriction sites
148I14
315F14

n nx b b

n
x
n b
m n

n b
nx b

n n
xb
mn

327P21

b

(nxmn)3 e

e nxmn
nbn

n
e b
n m
nxn n x n xnm nn

235I11

n
n
x n
n n
x
n e n b nn e x mmmmmmmmmm b n n

352E14

2.4kb repeats

E1

E7

nnxbb

m
m
b n
b x n

2.4kb repeats

E1

E2-6

nnxnb
LINE

mb n
m b x nmm b

n
x
n
m m
b nn e x nmmmmmmmmmb nn

E2-6

DAZ 4
bn

nnxnb
LINE

e
n
n
m
n xm n xm nx n
n
n
m
m
m
n x n xn n xn

b
n
x
nm n

E8-11

E8-11

E7

E8-11

DAZ 3
(nxmn)2

nxmn
e

e

nnxnb
LINE

nnxnb

bn

nbn
566F22

nb

b
n

bn b

nn

x
n
n
x
x n
b n bx b nn n b nb b

530K16

b x
eb bb b
b
bx
e b b b bbbbb b

546E5

293A20

bb
bb b

b
bb b

482K23

b

b

415B11

412O16

b

n
nx bb

n
x
mb
mmmmn n

n
m
n x

n
n nx bb

n
b
x
mmm m n n

n
m
n xm n x n

x
n nbb

b
n
mmmm x n

m
mn
n x n nx e

n nx bb

nx b
mmm mnn

m
n
m
n
n x n x e

b
mmmmx n nn

n
n
xe
m
x n nm

n
b
nx b
x b
n nb

n
b
x
mmmm m n n

ne
mnx n mx n

387E18

e
m xn
nx n n m

132B16
50D17

b
n n
n me x

n
b

e
n n
m x

n

b
nn

b
e
nn mn x n
m
bnn e n x n
n n
b m x
nn e x

x
n
n
b
m
n
e
n
n n
b m n
n
e x

n
nx
bn
bn
nnx
n
x
b
n n
bx
nn

bb x n n
e
b n
b x n

b b b bb n

n
bb x n
n
bb x n
343O6

b

b
bb bb b b x b e

b

xe
b b b bb b

n

b
n
b

b

b

n
b nx

m

m
b bnx b b

x
n b b b bb b b
x
b b b b

b b b

b

Fig. 17.11 Map of the DAZ region of the human Y chromosome generated by optical mapping. Sites for restriction enzymes are
represented as follows: x, XhoI; b, BamHI; n, NheI; e, EagI; m, MluI. (Redrawn with permission from Giacolone et al. 2000.)

different BAC clones that hybridize to the locus the
structure became apparent (Giacolone et al. 2000).
Rather than consisting of two copies of the DAZ gene,
as originally thought, the locus consists of four copies
of the gene, each with its own distinctive arrangement
of repetitive elements (Fig. 17.11).
Radiation hybrid (RH) mapping involves
screening of randomly broken fragments of
DNA for specific markers
RH mapping was developed originally to facilitate
the mapping of the human genome. In this method,
a high dose of X-rays is used to break the human
chromosome into fragments and these fragments are
recovered in rodent cells using somatic cell hybrids
(see Box 17.2). The rodent–human hybrid clones are
isolated and examined for the presence or absence
of specific human DNA markers. The farther apart
two markers are on the chromosome, the more likely
a given dose of radiation will break the chromosome
between them, placing the markers on two separate

chromosomal fragments. By estimating the frequency
of breakage, and thus the distance, between markers
it is possible to determine their order in a manner
analogous to conventional meiotic mapping.
Radiation hybrid mapping has a number of advantages over conventional genetic (meiotic) mapping.
First, chromosome breakage is random and there
are no hot-spots, interference, or gender-specific
differences as seen with recombination. Secondly, a
much higher resolution can be achieved, e.g. 100–
500 kb in radiation mapping as opposed to 1–3 Mb
in genetic mapping, and the resolution can be varied
by varying the radiation dose. Finally, it is not necessary to use polymorphic markers; monomorphic
markers such as STSs can be used as well.
The possible outcomes in a radiation hybrid
mapping experiment are shown schematically in
Fig. 17.12. In this figure, P is the probability of retention,
i.e. the probability that a DNA segment is present
in an RH clone or the proportion of clones containing a specific DNA segment. The value of P is a
function of the radiation dose and the cell lines used

359

Mapping and sequencing genomes

Box 17.2 Somatic cell hybrids
Somatic cell hybrids are cell lines that contain
a full complement of chromosomes of one
species but only one or a limited number of
chromosomes from the second. They are
formed by fusing the cells of the two different
species by applying conditions that select
against the two donor cells. One of the parents
may be sensitive to a particular drug and the
other might be a mutant requiring special
conditions for growth, e.g. thymidine kinase
negative cells do not grow in hypoxanthine,
aminopterin and thymidine (HAT) medium.
In the presence of the drug and HAT medium,
only hybrid cells containing a functional

thymidine kinase gene can grow. If hybrid cells
are grown under non-selective conditions after
the initial selection, chromosomes from one of
the parents tend to be lost more or less at
random. In the case of human–rodent fusions,
which are the most common, the human
chromosomes are preferentially lost.
Eventually only one or a few chromosomes
from one parent remain. In this way rodent
cell lines containing one or two human
chromosomes have been constructed and
these can be used to isolate the individual
human chromosomes by FACS.

A
+
+
–
–

X-rays
A
B
No break, 1 – θ

Break, θ

A
B
P

Fig. 17.12
Probability of different
outcomes in a radiation
hybrid experiment.

A
B
Q

P2

A
B
Retention pattern: A+B+
Probability:

P(1 – θ)

B Probability
+ P(1 – θ) + P2θ
–
PQθ
+
PQθ
– Q(1 – θ) + Q2θ

A
B

PQ

PQ

Q2

A
B

A–B–

A+B+

A+B–

A–B+

A–B–

Q(1 – θ)

P2θ

PQθ

PQθ

Q2θ

and usually ranges from 10–50% with maximum
mapping power occurring when P = 50%. It is
assumed that P is constant over small regions or
the entire chromosome and that segments are lost
or retained independently of each other.
The breakage probability (θ) is the probability that
two markers are separated by one or more breaks.
The closer the linkage between two markers, the
closer to zero is the value of θ whereas for unlinked
markers the value is 1. Note that breakage probability is a function of the radiation dose and the cell
lines used.
In radiation hybrid mapping distances are expressed in Rays or centiRays, where 1 cR equals a
1% frequency of breakage. Distances are calculated
from the expression:

Map distance (D) = −loge(1 − θ)Rays
and assume that the number of breaks is determined by a Poisson distribution with mean D. This
is analagous to Haldane’s map function for genetic
mapping. In the above equation, if θ is 0.1 then the
distance is 11 cR and if it is 0.3 the distance is 36 cR.
Distances determined by radiation hybrid mapping
can be converted to physical distances if the physical
distance between any two markers is known. For
example, the q arm of human chromosome 11 is 86
Mb and 1618 cR. Therefore, 1 cR is equal to 53 kb.
However, the mapping distance is dependent on the
radiation dose applied as shown in Table 17.2.
Although radiation hybrid mapping was originally developed for the human genome it has been

360

CHAPTER 17

extended to a number of other vertebrate genomes
including the mouse, rat, dog, pig, cow, horse, baboon,
and zebra fish (for references see Geisler et al. 1999).
Once a radiation hybrid panel is available, one can
map any physical marker (STS, EST, simple sequence
length polymorphism (SSLP), etc.) by looking for
linkage to existing markers on the map.

tion, or hybrid cell formation. The technique has been
used with particular success with a number of protist
genomes (Piper et al. 1998, Konfortov et al. 2000)
whose high AT content causes problems in cloning
and sequencing.
It should be clear from the above discussion that
the useful resolution and range of a HAPPY mapping panel depends upon the mean size of the
DNA fragments and this can be controlled by size
fractionation. As a rough approximation, a panel
will be able to resolve the order of markers over distances as small as 0.1 times the mean fragment size.
More closely spaced markers will co-segregate almost
completely and will not be resolved. Conversely, the
technique will detect the linkage between markers
which are separated by up to 0.8 times the mean
fragment size. More widely spaced markers do not
significantly co-segregate. Therefore, by controlling
the degree of fragmentation of the DNA, panels may
be created of any desired range or resolution.

HAPPY mapping is a more versatile variation
on RH mapping

It is essential that the different mapping
methods are integrated

A number of operational issues have restricted the
utility of RH mapping. First, it takes considerable
effort to generate an RH panel, even for mammalian
genomes, and complications arise because the biological activity of donor fragments in the host cell
lines biases their segregation. Second, the presence
of a host genome in the hybrids precludes the use of
generic markers such as AFLPs and RAPDs. Finally,
the technique is not applicable to plants. HAPPY mapping represents an easy and generic alternative to
RH mapping and has been used to map the human
genome (Dear et al. 1998), animal genomes (Konfortev
et al. 2000, Piper et al. 1998) and the Arabidopsis
genome (Thangavelu et al. 2003).
The principle of HAPPY mapping is shown in
Fig. 17.13 and involves breaking genomic DNA
randomly by irradiation or shearing followed by an
optional size fractionation step. Markers then are
segregated by diluting the resulting fragments to
give aliquots containing one haploid genome equivalent (hence “HAPPY” mapping).
Markers are detected using the PCR and linked
markers tend to be found together in an aliquot.
The map order of markers, and the distance between
them, are deduced from the frequency with which
they co-segregate. The advantages of this method are
that it is fast and accurate and is not subject to the
distortions inherent in cloning, meiotic recombina-

Each of the mapping methods described above has its
advantages and disadvantages and no one method is
ideal. The size and complexity of the genome being
analyzed can greatly influence the methodologies
employed in map construction. Nor is it uncommon
for different research groups to use different mapping
methods even when working on the same genome.
Ultimately, the maps generated by the different
methods need to be integrated. This is happening.
For example, the BAC clones used to construct the
human cytogenetic map (Cheung et al. 2001) have
STSs that reference the radiation hybrid and linkage maps. Chen et al. (2001) have devised a mapping
method for rapid assembly and ordering of BAC
clones on a radiation hybrid panel using STSs
and PCR. Similarly, integrated maps are being constructed in other species, e.g. the rat (Bihoreau
et al. 2001), maize (Yim et al. 2002), and rice (Chen
et al. 2002).
Many genomic mapping projects involve ordering two classes of objects relative to one another.
These are breakpoints and markers (Table 17.3).
Breakpoints, so called because they represent subdivisions of the genome, are defined by a specific
experimental resource. Markers consist of unique
sites in the genome and should be independent of
any particular experimental resource. Although both
types of object are essential for map construction, the

Table 17.2 Variation in mapping distance with
radiation dose.

Radiation dose (rad)
3,000
9,000
10,000
50,000

Physical distance
of 1 cR (kb)
300
50–70
25
4

361

Mapping and sequencing genomes

(a)

(b)

1

A B

Z
A B

A B

A B

Z

Z

PEP

2

A B

Z

Z

A B

A B

B

A B
A

B A AB
B
A
B AA
B AB
AB A

Dilute and split

A
A

A

A

B
B
B A
A

3

A B
Z

4

A

A B

B

–
–

A
B

A

A A AA
A
A A A AA
A AA A
A AA A
A

B

B B BB
B
B B B BB
B BB B
B BB B
B

A B
.....

Phase1 PCR
(multiplex)

Z

A B AB A
AB B A
A BA
B A
A AB
BB

–

A
Z

Z
A B

B
A

–
–

–
–

Z
5

A

B

Phase2
PCRs
(specific)

Z

Score
(gel)

Fig. 17.13 Principle of HAPPY mapping and marker typing. (a) Overview, DNA carrying STS markers (A, B, Z) is extracted from
cells (1) and broken randomly to give a pool of fragments (2). These are dispensed at limiting dilution into a series of aliquots –
the mapping panel (3). The panel is screened by PCR to produce a table (4) showing the marker content of each aliquot. Linked
markers (A, B) are found to co-segregate; remote markers (B, Z) do not. Co-segregation frequencies reflect marker-to-marker
distances, allowing a map (5) to be computed. (b) Expanded view of marker screening using a three-step PCR. The protocol is
illustrated for one aliquot of the mapping panel. All DNA in the sample is first preamplified >100-fold using primer extension
PCR (PEP). This material is diluted and split into subfractions for multiple rounds of screening. One subfraction is amplified in
a multiplex PCR for many markers (Phase 1). The products of this reaction are then diluted and split again, and screened for
individual markers (A, B, Z) in turn, using hemi-nested primers (Phase 2). Results are scored on gels, determining the marker
content of the aliquot.

Table 17.3 Categorization of map objects. (Reproduced with permission from Cox et al. 1994, © American Association
for the Advancement of Science.)

Mapping method

Experimental resource

Breakpoints

Meiotic
Radiation hybrid

Pedigrees
Hybrid cell lines

In situ hybridization
STS content
Clone-based fingerprinting

Chromosomes
Library of clones
Library of clones

Recombination sites
Radiation-induced
chromosome breaks
Cytological landmarks
End points of clones
End points of clones

map itself should be defined in terms of markers,
especially those based on DNA sequence. One reason
for this is that markers are permanent and easily
shared. They can be readily stored as DNA sequence

Markers
DNA polymorphisms
STSs
DNA probes
STSs
Genomic restriction sites

information and distributed in this fashion. By
contrast, breakpoints are defined by experimental
resources that tend to be transient and cumbersome
to distribute. The most important reason to use

362

CHAPTER 17

sequence-based markers is that they can be easily
screened against any DNA source. Thus they can
be used to integrate maps constructed by diverse
methods and investigators. Such integration is crucial to the assembly and assessment of maps.
The breakpoints divide the genome into “bins”
corresponding to the regions between breakpoints.
In assessing mapping progress a first step is to determine the number of “bins” that are occupied by
markers and the distribution of these markers within
each bin. Although some investigators report only
the total number of markers used to construct the
map, it is the number of occupied bins that provides the measure of progress. The distribution of
the number of markers per bin is important because
the goal is to have markers evenly, or at least
randomly, spread rather than clustered.
The second step in assessing progress is to identify those occupied bins that are ordered relative to
one another and to estimate the confidence in the
ordering. Note that assignment of markers to bins
can proceed throughout a mapping project but the
ordering of bins is only possible as a project matures.
Thus ordering is a good indication of the degree of
completion. Finally, the distance in kilobases between
ordered markers in a map needs to be measured.
As noted in Table 17.3, different experimental
resources are used to construct the different kinds of
maps. If consistency is to be achieved then it follows
that different groups must use identical experimental
material. Thus a key part of mapping is the construction of genomic libraries and cell lines by one
research group for distribution to everyone who
needs them. This has huge cost and logistical problems. Nevertheless, such libraries and cell lines are
being made available. For example, Osoegawa et al.
(2000, 2001) have constructed BAC libraries of the
human and mouse genomes that are the universal
reference material. Similarly, the BACs used for the
cytogenetic mapping of the human genome (Cheung
et al. 2001) are available from various stock centers.
In the context of resources, the work of the Centre
d’Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) deserves
special mention. This organization was set up as a
reference source for studies on human genetics. The
need for such a reference source stems from the fact
that directed matings in humans are not acceptable
and because the human breeding cycle is too long to
be experimentally useful. Consequently, CEPH maintains cell lines from three-generation human families,
consisting in most cases of four grandparents, two
parents and an average of eight children (Dausset

et al. 1990). Originally cell lines from 40 families
were kept but the number now is much larger. Such
families are ideal for genetic mapping because it is
possible to infer which allele was inherited from
which parent (see Fig. 17.3 for example). The CEPH
distributes DNAs from these families to collaborating
investigators around the world.

Sequencing genomes
High-throughput sequencing is an essential
prerequisite for genome sequencing
As noted in the previous chapter, genomes range in
size from millions of base pairs to thousands of millions. Given that a single Sanger sequencing reaction
allows 500–600 bases to be sequenced, it is clear that
automation is essential. The theoretical sequencing
capacity of an automated DNA sequencer is easy to
calculate. For a four-dye slab gel system, the capacity
is the number of sequencing reactions that can be
loaded on each gel, times the number of bases read
from each sample, times the number of gels that can
be run at once, times the number of days this can be
carried out per year. For a 24-channel sequencer the
capacity calculated in this way is 2.7 million bases
per year. To use just one such instrument to sequence
the human genome would require over 1000 years
for single pass coverage and this clearly is not a
practicable proposition.
To meet the demands of large-scale sequencing,
96-channel instruments have become commonplace and at least one 384-channel instrument has
been developed (Shibata et al. 2000). By switching
from slab gels to capillary systems, the electrophoresis run time is greatly reduced and nine runs can be
achieved per 24 h period. Various other improvements to the biochemistry of the sequencing reactions
and the chemistry of the gel matrix mean that the
read length can be extended from the usual 500–
600 bases to 800 bases. As a consequence it now is
possible to generate 1–6 million bases of sequence
per machine per month (Meldrum 2000b, Elkin
et al. 2001) and Amersham Biosciences claim over
1 million bases in 8 hours or 2.8 million bases in
24 hours for their MegaBACE 4000 instrument.
By way of comparison, 10 years ago the best that
could be achieved was only (!) 40,000 bases per
month (Fleischmann et al. 1995). Those laboratories
engaged in sequencing large genomes have large
numbers of sequencing machines and can generate

Mapping and sequencing genomes

millions of base sequences per day, e.g. in excess of
18 million (Elkin et al. 2001).
To achieve the levels of sequence data quoted
above it is not sufficient to have sequencing instruments with a high capacity. There are many manipulative steps required before samples are loaded
on gels in preparation for electrophoresis. For
example, DNA has to be isolated, fragmented, and
then cloned or amplified. The DNA then has to be
re-isolated and subjected to the various sequencing
reactions described earlier. Each of these procedures
is labor intensive. Not surprisingly, there now are
machines that can automate every one of them and
details of these machines have been provided by
Meldrum (2000a).
There are two different strategies for
sequencing genomes
Two different strategies have been developed for the
sequencing of whole genomes: the “clone-by-clone”
approach and “whole-genome shotgun sequencing”.
The relative merits of the two strategies have generated much debate, particularly in relation to the
sequencing of the human genome. An understanding of this debate, and the terminology used (Box 17.3),
is necessary to appreciate some of the landmark
genome sequencing publications. More recently, the
debate has cooled with the adoption of hybrid strategies for the sequencing of genomes.
As noted earlier, Sanger sequencing has an accurate read length of 500–800 bases. One approach to

363

sequencing a genome would be a shotgun approach
in which a random selection of sequencing reads
would be collected from a larger target DNA sequence.
With sufficient oversampling (coverage) it should
be possible to infer the complete genome sequence
by piecing together the individual sequence reads.
In practice, two problems will arise. First, the
presence of dispersed repeated sequences will confound the sequence assembly. Second, assembly of
sequences into contigs will be possible but there
will be gaps between contigs that will need closing
by other means. The numbers of these problems
should increase linearly with the size of the genome
to be analyzed. Consequently, it was assumed that
targets the size of cosmids represented the limit of
the shotgun approach. Thus, whole genomes would
be sequenced by first developing a set of overlapping cosmids that had been ordered by physical
mapping (Fig. 17.14). This is the “clone-by-clone”
or “map-based” approach and it was used successfully to generate the complete genome sequence of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Goffeau et al. 1996) and the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans Sequencing Consortium 1998).
The view that cosmids represented the size
limit for shotgun sequencing was destroyed when
Fleischmann et al. (1995) determined the 1,830,137
bp sequence of the bacterium Hemophilus influenzae
without prior mapping. The starting point was
the preparation of genomic DNA, which then was
mechanically sheared and size fractionated. Fragments between 1.6 and 2.0 kb in size were selected,

Box 17.3 Some definitions used in genome sequencing projects
Contig An overlapping series of clones
or sequence reads that corresponds to a
contiguous segment of the source genome

Finished sequence The complete sequence of
a clone or genome with a defined level of
accuracy and contiguity

Coverage The average number of times a
genomic segment is represented in a
collection of clones or sequence reads.
Coverage is synonymous with redundancy

Full-shotgun sequence A type of pre-finished
sequence with sufficient coverage to make it
ready for sequence finishing

Minimal tiling path A minimal set of
overlapping clones that together provides
complete coverage across a genomic region
Sequence-ready map An overlapping
bacterial clone map with sufficiently
redundant clone coverage to allow for the
rational selection of clones for sequencing

Prefinished sequence Sequence derived from
a preliminary assembly during a shotgunsequencing project
Working draft sequence A type of prefinished sequence with sufficient coverage
(8- to 10-fold) to make it ready for sequence
finishing

364

CHAPTER 17

Genome or chromosome
Conventional

Sequence-tagged
connectors

Chromosome (250 Mb)

BAC, PAC or YAC

Chromosome

BAC, PAC or YAC library
Low-resolution
map

BAC library
Array 300,000 BACs
Sequence both ends
Fingerprint each BAC

1500 kb
Cosmid library

Select seed BAC
High-resolution
map

Cosmid

150 kb
M13 or plasmid library

40 kb
M13 or plasmid library
Plasmid
(5–10 kb)
or M13 (1 kb)

Random or
shotgun
Sequence 800 clones and
assemble

Sequence 3000 clones and assemble
Find 30 overlapping BACs from STCs

Choose minimum cosmid overlap
Sequence cosmids in both directions

Fingerprint comparisons
Sequence BACs with minimal overlap
at each end and repeat
BACs

Cosmids
Cosmid walking

BAC walking

STCs

Fig. 17.14 Comparison of the conventional sequence approach with that proposed by Venter et al. (1996) (see text for full
details). BAC, bacterial artificial chromosone; STC, sequence-tagged connector. (Redrawn from Venter et al. 1996 with permission
from Nature, © Macmillan Magazines Ltd.)

this narrow range being chosen to minimize variation
in the growth of clones. In addition, with a maximum
size of only 2.0 kb the number of complete genes on a
DNA fragment is minimized thereby reducing the
chance of their loss through expression of deleterious
gene products. The selected fragments were ligated
to a sequencing vector and again size fractionated to
minimize contamination from double-insert chimeras
or free vector. Finally, all cloning was undertaken in
host cells deficient in all recombination and restriction functions to prevent deletion and rearrangement
of inserts.
Many other bacterial genomes have been sequenced
using the same basic method as was used for the
H. influenzae genome (see Fig. 18.1). However, it
should be realized that much of the success of the
method stems from the fact that bacterial genomes
contain virtually no repeated DNA (see p. 328) to
complicate contig assembly. Nevertheless, the success of the method led Venter et al. (1996) to propose

a method for sequencing the entire human genome
without first constructing a physical map. Rather
than using yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) and
cosmids it would use bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) (Fig. 17.14), which can accept inserts
up to 350 kb in length. A BAC library is prepared
which has an average insert size of 150 kb and a
15-fold coverage of the genome in question. The
individual clones making up the library are arrayed
in microtiter wells for ease of manipulation. Starting
at the vector-insert points, both ends of each BAC
clone are then sequenced to generate 500 bases
from each end. These BAC end sequences will be
scattered approximately every 5 kb across the genome
and make up 10% of the sequence. These “sequencetagged connectors” (STCs) will allow any one BAC
clone to be connected to about 30 others. In effect,
STCs are simply very long STSs (see p. 348).
Each BAC clone would be fingerprinted (see
Box 17.4) using one restriction enzyme to provide the

365

Mapping and sequencing genomes

Box 17.4 The principle of restriction enzyme fingerprinting
The principle of restriction enzyme
fingerprinting was originally developed
for the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
(Coulson et al. 1986) and yeast (Olson et al.
1986). In its original format the starting
material was a genomic library made in
cosmids. Each cosmid clone was digested
with a restriction endonuclease with a
hexanucleotide recognition sequence and
which leaves staggered ends, e.g. HindIII.
The ends of the fragments were labeled
by end-filling with reverse transcriptase
in the presence of a radioactive nucleoside
triphosphate. The HindIII was destroyed by
heating and the fragments cleaved again
with a restriction endonuclease with a
tetranucleotide recognition sequence,
e.g. Sau3AI. The fragments were separated
on a high resolution gel and detected by
autoradiography, the output being a clone
fingerprint (Fig. B17.2). Note that the
fingerprint is not an order of restriction

sites; rather, it is a series of clusters of bands
based on the probability of overlap of clones.
Although restriction enzyme fingerprinting
was applied to genomes such as those from
Drosophila (Siden-Kiamos et al. 1990),
Arabidopsis (Hauge et al. 1991), and the
human genome (Bellané-Chantelot et al.
1992, Trask et al. 1992), the method generally
fell out of favor except for microbial genomes
(for reviews see Cole & Saint Girons 1994,
Fonstein & Haselkorn 1995). The reasons for
this were twofold. First, cosmids with an
average insert size of 40 kb have relatively few
sites for any single restriction endonuclease.
This means that to generate the necessary
numbers of fragments to allow statistically
significant matching of overlaps it is necessary
to use double digests and radioactive
labeling methods. This methodology is not
reproducible, nor is it amenable to large-scale
mapping efforts (Marra et al. 1997, Little
2001). Secondly, the problems of detecting

(a)

H

H
S

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

Vector

S
Vector

(i) Hin dIII digestion (H)
(ii) Reverse transcriptase
+ dATP [35S]
Vector

*
*

*

Vector

*

Sau 3AI digestion (s)

Fig. B17.2 The principle of
restriction-fragment fingerprinting.
(a) The generation of labeled
restriction fragments (see text for
details). (b) Pattern generated from
four different clones. Note the
considerable band sharing between
clones 1, 2 and 3 indicating that they
are contiguous whereas clone 4 is
not contiguous and has few bands
in common with the other three.
(c) The contig map produced from
data shown in (b). (Adapted and
redrawn with permission from
Coulson et al. 1986.)

*
*

Vector

(b)

*

*

Vector

1
2
3
4

(c)

4
3
2
1

continued

366

CHAPTER 17

Box 17.4
overlaps from fingerprint patterns grow
exponentially as the size of the genome being
mapped increases.
Two developments have led to a resurgence
in restriction enzyme fingerprinting. The first
of these was the development of a highthroughput method of fingerprinting using
large-insert clones (Marra et al. 1997). In this
method bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
and P1-derived artificial chromosome (PAC)
clones replace the cosmids used by Coulson
et al. (1986). Because these clones have
insert sizes of 150 kb they yield many easily
detectable fragments on digestion with a
single restriction enzyme (Fig. B17.3). By
measuring the relative mobilities of the
fragments it is possible to develop a
fingerprint of each clone and to identify
other clones that share a large proportion of
fragments with the same relative mobilities.
In this way it is possible to infer the overlap of
clones and construct contigs. Two other
features of the method are worth noting. First,
because only single digestion is involved, nonradioactive detection methods can be used.
However, because of the small quantities of
DNA obtainable with low-copy-number
vectors, such as BACs and PACs, highsensitivity detection is required. This is

continued
achieved by using fluorescent dyes and highly
sensitive fluorescence imagers. Secondly, the
method enables the size of each restriction
fragment and each clone to be estimated.
This is particularly useful when designing
sequencing strategies.
The second development that led to the
resurgence of restriction fragment mapping
was the creation of powerful software called
fingerprinted contigs (FPC) to carry out the
massive task of comparing the fingerprints of
different clones and determining which ones
overlap (Soderlund et al. 2000). The FPC
software is used in conjunction with the
methodology of Marra et al. (1997). To
determine if two clones overlap, the number
of shared bands is counted, where two bands
are considered “shared” if they have the same
size within a tolerance. The probability that
the number of shared bands is a coincidence
is computed and, if this score is below a user
specified cutoff, the clones are considered to
overlap. In a test of this software the largest
contig constructed consisted of 9534 clones.
Such a contig could not be constructed
manually. An additional benefit of the FPC
software is that it can accommodate the use of
physical markers such as sequence-tagged
sites (STSs), etc.

Fig. B17.3 A typical agarosemapping gel showing human P1derived artificial chromosomes
(PACs) digested with HindIII. Clones
are present in triplicate to verify
stability during propagation and to
check for the possibility of crosscontamination. DNA size standards
are present in every fifth lane.
(Photograph kindly supplied by
Dr. M. Marra.)

367

Mapping and sequencing genomes

insert size and detect artifactual clones by comparing
the fingerprints with those of overlapping clones.
A seed BAC of interest is sequenced and checked
against the database of STCs to identify the 30 or so
overlapping BAC clones. The two BAC clones showing internal consistency among the fingerprints
and minimal overlap at either end then would be
sequenced. In this way the entire human genome
could be sequenced with just over 20,000 BAC
clones. This proposal was not universally accepted
but subsequently a modification of it was used to
sequence chromosome 2 (19.6 Mb) of Arabidopsis
thaliana (Lin et al. 1999b) and the entire human
genome (International Human Genome Sequencing
Consortium 2001).
Whereas Venter et al. (1996) proposed a hierarchical shotgun approach in which end sequences
(STCs) are used to provide long-range continuity
across the genome, Weber & Myers (1997) proposed a total shotgun approach to the sequencing
of the human genome. In this approach, DNA would
be sheared and size-selected before being cloned in
E. coli. Cloned inserts would fall into two classes:

long inserts of size 5–20 kb and short inserts of size
0.4–1.2 kb. Sequencing read lengths would be of
sufficient magnitude so that the two sequence reads
from the ends of the short inserts overlap. Both ends
of the long inserts also would be sequenced and,
because their spacing and orientation are known,
they can be used to create a scaffold on which the
short sequences can be assembled. This approach
was not well received (Green 1997, Marshall &
Pennisi 1998) but Myers et al. (2000) were able to
show the validity of the approach by applying it to
the 120 Mb euchromatic portion of the Drosophila
melanogaster genome. Venter et al. (2001) then applied
the method to the sequencing of the human genome.
However, in both these cases, end sequences also
were determined for 50 kb inserts in BACs to provide additional scaffolding information. Also, in the
case of the human sequence, any sequence-tagged
sites (STSs) that were detected helped to locate the
fragment in the context of the overall genome STS
map. An indication of the workload associated with
sequencing the human genome in this way can be
obtained by consideration of the data in Table 17.4.

Table 17.4 Sequencing statistics for the shotgun sequencing of the human genome as undertaken by Venter et al.
(2001). Note that the DNA sequenced was derived from five different individuals (A, B, C, D, and F).

Number of reads for different insert libraries
Individual

2 kbp

10 kbp

50 kbp

Total

No. of sequencing reads

A
B
C
D
F
Total

Fold sequence coverage
(2.9 Gb genome)

A
B
C
D
F
Total

0
2.20
0.16
0.18
0
2.54

0
1.40
1.17
0.20
0.28
2.04

0.52
0.01
0
0
0
0.53

0.52
3.61
0.32
0.37
0.28
5.11

Fold clone coverage

A
B
C
D
F
Total

0
2.96
0.22
0.24
0
3.42

0
11.26
1.33
1.58
2.26
16.43

18.39
0.44
0
0
0
18.84

18.39
14.67
1.54
1.82
2.26
38.68

Insert size (mean)

Average

1951 bp

Insert size (SD)

Average

6.10%

Total number
of base pairs

0
0 2,767,357 2,767,357 1,502,674,851
11,736,757 7,467,755
66,930 19,271,442 10,464,393,006
853,819
881,290
0 1,735,109
942,164,187
952,523 1,046,815
0 1,999,338 1,085,640,534
0 1,498,607
0 1,498,607
813,743,601
13,543,099 10,894,467 2,834,287 27,271,853 14,808,616,179

10,800 bp 50,715 bp
8.10%

14.90%

368

CHAPTER 17

(a)

(b)

Overlapping eBACS

Join and repeat
local assembly
WGS
‘Bait’

‘Bactigs’ > 1 Mb

+

Join via
paired-end reads
‘Catch’
‘Superbactigs’

Local
assembly

Further joining:
FPC, paired-end reads, other data

eBAC

‘Ultrabactigs’

‘Enriched BAC:
~150 kb’

Align to chromosomes

Fig. 17.15 The new combined genome sequencing strategy. (a) Formation of eBACs. Modest sequence coverage (~1.8-fold)
from a BAC is used as bait to catch whole genome sequence reads from the same region of the genome. These reads, and their mate
pairs, are assembled using Phrap to form an eBAC. This stringent local assembly retains 95% of the catch. (b) Creation of higher
order structures. Multiple eBACs are assembled into bactigs based on sequence overlaps. The bactigs are joined into superbactigs
by large clone mate-pair information (at least two links), extended into ultrabactigs using additional information (single links, FPC
contigs, synteny, markers), and ultimately aligned to genome-mapping data (radiation hybrid and physical maps) to form the
complete assembly. Reproduced with permission from Nature.

A combination of shotgun sequencing and
physical mapping now is the favored method
for sequencing large genomes
There is no doubt that assembling a complete
genome sequence is relatively easy if one has a
collection of sequence-ready clones that already are
ordered on a physical map. However, constructing
the map is very laborious and takes much longer
than sequencing. By contrast, whole-genome shotgun sequencing is very fast but sequence assembly
is very prone to errors. In sequencing the human
genome, Venter et al. (2001) made extensive use of
the physical maps provided by the International
Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (2001).
The draft mouse genome sequence was produced by
shotgun sequencing but under-represented duplicated regions because of problems in assembling
sequences (Mouse Genome Sequencing Consortium
2002).
To overcome the limitations of the two basic
approaches to genome sequencing, the Rat Genome
Sequencing Project Consortium (2004) adopted a
combined approach involving shotgun sequencing

and BAC sequencing (Fig. 17.15). In the combined
approach, shotgun sequence data are progressively
melded with light sequence coverage of individual
BACs (BAC skims) to yield intermediate products
called enriched BACs (eBACs). eBACs covering the
whole genome then are joined into longer structures
called bactigs. These bactigs are joined to form larger
structures called superbactigs and these superbactigs link up to form ultrabactigs. Other data such as
STCs, DNA fingerprints, and physical markers are
used as appropriate to facilitate the sequence assembly process.
Gaps in sequences occur with all genomesequencing methodologies and need to
be closed
No matter what sequencing strategy is used there
always are gaps at the assembly stage. These gaps
fall into two categories: sequence gaps where a template exists and physical gaps where no template
occurs. Sequence gaps can be closed using a primerdirected walking strategy as shown in Fig. 17.16.
Physical gaps are much harder to close. In the case of

369

Mapping and sequencing genomes

Sequence contig 1

Sequence contig 2

Cloned DNA insert in cosmid
PCR primer
PCR primer

Multiple PCR cycles

Clone-amplified DNA

Fig. 17.16 Linking
DNA sequence contigs
by walking.

the shotgun sequencing of the H. influenzae genome,
a number of techniques were used. For example,
oligonucleotide primers were designed and synthesized from the end of each contig. These primers
were used in hybridization reactions based on the
premise that labeled oligonucleotides homologous
to the ends of adjacent contigs should hybridize to
common DNA restriction fragments (Fig. 17.17a).
Links were also made by searching each contig end
against a peptide database. If the ends of two contigs
matched the same database sequence, then the two
contigs were tentatively assumed to be adjacent
(Fig. 17.17b). Finally, two λ libraries were constructed from genomic H. influenzae DNA and were
probed with the oligonucleotides designed from the
ends of each contig. Positive plaques then were used
to prepare templates and the sequence was determined from each end of the λ clone insert. These
sequence fragments were searched against a database of all contigs and two contigs that matched the
sequence from the opposite ends of the same λ clone
were ordered (Fig. 17.17c). The λ clone then provided the template for closure of the sequence gap.
Another method for closing gaps is to use representational difference analysis (Lisitsyn et al. 1993).
In this technique one undertakes a subtractive hybridization of the library DNA from the total genomic
DNA. In this way, Frohme et al. (2001) were able
to close 11 out of 13 gaps in the sequence of the
bacterium Xylella fastidiosa. Although this method
is useful for isolating sequences that fall within
gaps, any sequences isolated will not be useful if the
sequences cannot be assembled into a contig that
is anchored on at least one end of the gap.

Sequence-amplified DNA
and join sequence contigs

Direct cloning of DNA that is missing in libraries
is possible using transformation-associated recombination (TAR). As originally described (Larionov
et al. 1996), one starts with a YAC containing Alu
sequences. This vector is cleaved to generate two
fragments, one consisting of Alu–telomere and the
other of Alu–centromere–telomere. If these fragments
are mixed with high-molecular-weight human DNA
containing Alu sequences, recombination occurs during transformation to generate new YACs containing large human DNA inserts. Essentially, the Alu
sequences act as “hooks” and Noskov et al. (2003)
have shown that the minimal length of sequence
homology required is 60 bp. The hooks need not
be Alu sequences but could be sequences derived
from the ends of contigs that are used to trap DNA
spanning sequence gaps.
Some of the gaps in complete sequences arise
because of the difficulty of cloning DNA containing
centromeres and telomeres. The absence of telomeres
is easily explained: the absence of restriction sites
in the (TTAGGG)n repeat of telomeres means that
they are unlikely to be inserted into cloning vectors.
The solution to this problem is to use half-YACs.
These are circular yeast vectors containing a single
telomere that have a unique restriction site at the
end of the telomere (Riethman et al. 1989). On
cleavage with the appropriate restriction enzyme, a
linear molecule containing a single telomere at one
end (half-YAC) is generated. This molecule is incapable of replicating in a linear form in yeast unless
another telomere is added. Using such half-YACs,
Riethman et al. (2001) were able to link 32 telomere
regions to the draft sequence of the human genome.

370

CHAPTER 17

(a)

Contigs

1

A

2

3

B

4

5

C

6

7

D

8

Hybridization
1

5
Genomic restriction
fragment
Likely contig
order

(b)

Contigs

2

A

1

5

C

6

9

E

10

11

F

12

Peptide
sequence

Peptide
sequence

– –ARNDTSPFM– –
– – QEGCHYVR– –
Protein sequence
– – – – C K S A R N D T S P F M R M – – – – N D R Q E G C H Y V R E Q P S F – – – – from database
Likely contig
order
10

9

12

11

E

(c)

Contigs

13

G

14

F

15

H

16

17

J

18
λ clone

INSERT
Sequence

–––––––AAGCTTAGA–––––––––GGCTCCCATGGA––––
AAGCTTAGA
GGCTCCCATGGA
H

15

17

J

Fig. 17.17 The three methods for closing the physical gaps in sequencing by the method of Fleischmann et al. (1995). In each
case the sequences at the ends of contigs are shown as wavy lines and individual sequences are given separate numbers. Contigs
are denoted by large capital letters. In (b) the individual amino acids are represented by the standard single letter code. See text for
a detailed description of each method.

The quality of genome-sequence data needs
to be determined
When the techniques of gene manipulation were
developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
cloning was used to identify genes and then gene
sequencing was used to characterize the gene
product. With the development of high-throughput
genome sequencing there has been a fundamental
shift in the way biological research is undertaken.
Today, the sequencing of genomes not only drives
the discovery of genes but also is used to under-

stand the biology of organisms and their evolution.
However, if genome-sequence data is going to be
used in this way then it is essential that it is complete and that it is accurate. In 1997, the leading
scientists planning the sequencing of the human
genome established standards, known as the
Bermuda standards, for sequence fidelity (http://
www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/hugo/bermuda2.htm). These
standards stated that the finished sequence should
be 99.99% accurate and that the sequence should
be contiguous, i.e. there should be no gaps. As noted
earlier, every eukaryotic genome has regions that

371

Mapping and sequencing genomes

Table 17.5 Sequencing statistics for some eukaryotic genomes.

Organism

Year

Millions of
bases sequenced

Total
coverage (%)

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Caenorhabditis elegans
Drosophila melanogaster
Arabidopsis thaliana
Human chromosome 21
Human chromosome 22
Human genome (consortium)
Human genome (Venter et al.)

1996
1998
2000
2000
2000
1999
2001
2001

12
97
116
115
34
34
2693
2654

93
99
64
92
75
70
84
83

are difficult to clone and/or sequence. The extent of
these regions varies widely in different species and
each sequencing consortium has made a pragmatic
decision as to when they have sufficient level of
coverage for publication (Table 17.5). Further work
then is undertaken to eliminate the gaps. In the
case of the human genome, the finished sequence
was available for all of the 24 chromosomes by
mid-2004.
All published genome sequences are derived
by assembling thousands or millions of sequence
reads and generating a consensus base call for each
position in the assembly. The accuracy of a sequence
is the measure of how likely the base pairs in a
consensus sequence are to be the correct base call.
For 99.99% accuracy this means only one incorrect
base per 10,000 bp and in the case of the human
genome sequence this equates to a total of 300,000
base pair errors in a background of 3 million SNPs!
Accuracy usually is determined from error probability assessments generated by DNA base-calling
software (PHRED scores, p. 131) and by examining
discrepancies between overlapping clone sequences.
A retrospective quality assessment of the human
genome sequence showed that most of the consortium participants met the desired accuracy
standard and identified the commonest sources of
errors (Schmutz et al. 2004).

Coverage of
euchromatin (%)
100
100
97
100
100
97
90
88–93

different mapping methods can be combined to develop a
comprehensive physical and genetic map.
Donis-Keller H. et al. (1987) A genetic linkage map of
the human genome. Cell 51, 319–37. This is a classic
paper that presented the first physical map of the human
genome. It describes the identification and mapping of a
large number of RFLPs.
Fauth C. & Speicher M.R. (2001) Classifying by colors:
FISH-based genome analysis. Cytogenetics and Cell
Genetics 93, 1–10. This review details the different
applications of FISH and the simultaneous use of
fluorochromes.
Fleischmann R.D. et al. (1995) Whole-genome random
sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus influenzae
Rd. Science 269, 496–512. This is a classic paper
detailing the first complete sequence of a bacterial genome
and details the principles involved in shotgun sequencing
very large pieces of DNA.
Green E.D. (2001) Strategies for the systematic sequencing of complex genomes. Nature Reviews Genetics 2,
573–83. An excellent review that covers sequencing
strategy in more detail than possible in this chapter.

Suggested reading

Venter J.C. et al. (2001) The sequence of the human
genome. Science 291, 1304–51.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium
(2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the human
genome. Nature 409, 860–933.
These two papers and the articles that accompany them give
details of how two large sequencing groups undertook the
massive task of sequencing the human genome. As well as
describing the methodology that was used, they contain a
wealth of interesting information.

Breen M. et al. (2001) Chromosome-specific single locus
FISH probes allow anchorage of an 1800-marker
integrated radiation-hybrid/linkage map of the domestic dog genome to all chromosomes. Genome Research
11, 1784–95. This paper is an excellent example of how

International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium
(2004) Finished: the euchromatic sequence of the
human genome. Nature 431, 931–45.
This paper details the conversion of the “working draft” of
the human genome sequence into the finished sequence.

372

CHAPTER 17

Weber J.L. & Myers E.W. (1997) Human whole-genome
shotgun sequencing. Genome Research 5, 401–9.
Green P. (1997) Against whole-genome shotgun.
Genome Research 5, 410–17.
These two papers need to be read together as they give a
good overview of the arguments for and against shotgun
sequencing of large genomes. The first paper deals in detail
with potential problems of repeated sequences, etc.

Ambrust E.V., Berges J.A., Bowler C. et al. (2004) The
genome of the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana:
ecology, evolution and metabolism. Science 306,
79–86.
This article describes the use of a combination of sequencing
and optical mapping to sequence a 34 Mb genome.

Weier H.U. (2001) DNA fiber mapping techniques for
the assembly of high-resolution physical maps. Journal
of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry 49, 939–48.
This review summarizes different approaches to DNA
fiber mapping and recent achievements in mapping ESTs
and DNA replication sites.

Useful websites

Meyers B.C., Scalabrin S. & Morgante M. (2004)
Mapping and sequencing complex genomes: let’s get
physical! Nature Reviews Genetics 5, 578–88.
An excellent review that supplements the material in this
chapter, particularly in the areas of clone fingerprinting and
contig assembly.
Margulies M., Egholm M., Altman W.E. et al. (2005)
Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density
picolitre reactors. Nature 10, 1038.
This paper documents the application of pyrosequencing to
whole-genome sequencing as opposed to the resequencing of
short stretches of DNA.
Chan E.Y. (2005) Advances in sequencing technology.
Mutation Research 573, 13–40.
A review focusing on SNP discovery and personalized
medicine.

http://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/
This is the website of the US National Center for
Biotechnology Information. It contains a wealth of
information relating to genome sequencing and contains links to many other useful sites.
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
This is the website of the European Bioinformatics Institute. It contains a wealth of information on tools for
sequencing and analyzing genomes. It also provides an
up-to-date, standardized, and comprehensively annotated view of the genomic sequence of organisms whose
genomes have been completely sequenced.
http://nar.oupjournals.org/
Every year, the first issue of Nucleic Acids Research
(published in January) has short reviews of all the
molecular biology databases. All these reviews can be
downloaded free from this website.

CHAPTER 18
Comparative genomics

Introduction
Comparative genomics is the study of the differences
and similarities in genome structure and organization in different organisms. For example, how are the
differences between humans and other organisms
reflected in our genomes? How similar are the
number and types of proteins in humans, fruit flies,
worms, plants, yeasts, and bacteria? Essentially,
comparative genomics is no more than the application of the bioinformatics methods described in Chapter 9 to the analysis of whole-genome sequences
with the objective of identifying biological principles, i.e. biology in silico. In a sense this statement
greatly underplays the real value of comparative
genomics for, as the reader will soon see, it is
an extremely powerful technique and provides biological insights that could not be achieved in any
other way.
There are two drivers for comparative genetics.
One is a desire to have a much more detailed understanding of the process of evolution at the gross level
(the origin of the major classes of organism) and at a
local level (what makes related species unique). The
second driver is the need to translate DNA sequence
data into proteins of known function. The rationale
here is that DNA sequences encoding important
cellular functions are more likely to be conserved
between species than sequences encoding dispensable functions or non-coding sequences. Until
recently it was thought that the ideal species for
comparison are those whose form, physiology, and
behavior are as similar as possible but whose genomes have evolved sufficiently that non-functional
sequences have had time to diverge. More recently,
Bofelli et al. (2004) have shown that by comparing
genomes that are very distantly related, e.g. mammals and fish, it is possible to identify conserved
sequences that, presumably, have a significant
function.

The formation of orthologs and paralogs are
key steps in gene evolution
In order to compare genome organization in different organisms it is necessary to distinguish between
orthologs and paralogs. Orthologs are homologous
genes in different organisms that encode proteins
with the same function and which have evolved by
direct vertical descent. Paralogs are homologous
genes within an organism encoding proteins with
related but non-identical functions. Implicit in these
definitions is that orthologs evolve simply by the
gradual accumulation of mutations, whereas paralogs arise by gene duplication followed by mutation
accumulation. Good examples of paralogs are the
protein superfamilies described in Chapter 16 (see
Fig. 16.6 and Table 16.1).
There are many biochemical activities that are
common to most or all living organisms, e.g. the
citric acid cycle, the generation of ATP, the synthesis
of nucleotides, DNA replication, etc. It might be
thought that in each case the key proteins would
be orthologs. Indeed, “universal protein families”
shared by all archae, eubacteria, and eukaryotes
have been described (Kyrpides et al. 1999). However,
there is increasing evidence that functional equivalence of proteins requires neither sequence similarity
nor even common three-dimensional folds (Galperin
et al. 1998, Huynen et al. 1999). The existence of two
or more distinct sets of orthologs that are responsible
for the same function in different organisms is called
non-orthologous gene displacement. Now that close
to 200 different genomes have been sequenced it is
clear that gene displacement occurs within most
essential genes. That is, there are at least two biochemical solutions to each cellular requirement.
Only about 60 genes have been identified where
gene displacement has not been observed (as yet)
and most of these encode components of the trancription and translation systems (Koonin 2003).

374

CHAPTER 18

Protein evolution occurs by exon shuffling
Analysis of protein sequences and three-dimensional
structures has revealed that many proteins are composed of discrete domains. These so-called mosaic
proteins are particularly abundant in the metazoa.
The majority of mosaic proteins are extracellular or
constitute the extracellular parts of membranebound proteins and thus they may have played an
important part in the evolution of multicellularity.
The individual domains of a mosaic protein are often
involved in specific functions which contribute to its
overall activity. These domains are evolutionarily
mobile which means that they have spread during
evolution and now occur in otherwise unrelated
proteins (Doolittle 1995). Mobile domains are characterized by their ability to fold independently. This
is an essential characteristic because it prevents
misfolding when they are inserted into a new protein

environment. To date, over 60 mobile domains have
been identified.
A survey of the genes that encode mosaic proteins reveals a strong correlation between domain
organization and intron–exon structure (Kolkman
& Stemmer 2001); i.e. each domain tends to be
encoded by one or a combination of exons and new
combinations of exons are created by recombination within the intervening sequences. This process
yields rearranged genes with altered function and is
known as exon shuffling. Because the average intron
is much longer than the average exon and the recombination frequency is proportional to DNA length,
the vast majority of crossovers occur in non-coding
sequences. The large number of transposable elements and repetitive sequences in introns will
facilitate exon shuffling by promoting mismatching
and recombination of non-homologous genes. An
example of exon shuffling is described in Box 18.1.

Box 18.1 Hemostatic proteins as an example of exon shuffling
The process of blood coagulation and
fibrinolysis involves a complex cascade of
enzymatic reactions in which inactive
zymogens are converted into active enzymes.
These zymogens belong to the family of serine
proteases and their activation is accompanied
by proteolysis of a limited number of peptide
bonds. Comparison of the amino acid
sequences of the hemostatic proteases with
leader gla

EGF

kringle

PAN

fnl

fnll

those of archetypal serine proteases such
as trypsin shows that the former have large
N-terminal extensions (Fig. B18.1). These
extensions consist of a number of discrete
domains with functions such as substrate
recognition, binding of co-factors, etc.
and the different domains show a strong
correlation with the exon structure of the
encoding genes.

protease

Factor VII
Factor IX
Factor X
Protein C
Prothrombin
Prekallikrein
Factor XI
Factor XII
t-PA
u-PA
Plasminogen
0

100

200

300

400

500

Amino acid number

600

700

800

Fig. B18.1 Domain structures of
the regulatory proteases of blood
coagulation and fibrinolysis. The
different domains: gray, serine
protease domain; dark purple, EGFlike domain; dotted, Gla domain;
cross-hatch, PAN domain; light
purple, fibronectin type II domain
(fn2); black, fibronectin type I
domain (fn1). (Adapted from
Kolkman & Stemmer 2001.)

Comparative genomics

Although mosaic proteins are most common in
the metazoa, they are found in unicellular organisms. Because a large number of microbial genomes
have been sequenced, including representatives from
the three primary kingdoms (Archaea, Eubacteria,
and Eukarya), it is possible to determine the evolutionary mobility of domains. With this in mind, Wolf
et al. (2000a) searched the genomes of 15 bacteria,
four archaea, and one eukaryote for genes encoding proteins consisting of domains from the different kingdoms. They found 37 examples of proteins
consisting of a “native” domain and a horizontally
acquired “alien” domain. In several instances the
genome contained the gene for the mosaic protein
as well as a sequence encoding a stand-alone version
of the alien domain, but more usually the standalone counterpart was missing.

Comparative genomics of bacteria
By mid-2004 the website of the National Center
for Biotechnology Information listed 173 bacteria
(19 Archaea and 154 Eubacteria) whose genomes
had been sequenced (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/genomes/MICROBES/Complete.html). Simple
analysis of the sequence data reveals two features
of note. First, the genome sizes vary from 0.49 Mb
(Nanoarchaeum equitans) to 9.1 Mb (Bradyrhizobium
japonicum and two species of Streptomyces), i.e. a more
than 18-fold difference. Secondly, the gene density
is remarkably similar across all species and is about
1 gene per kilobase of DNA. This means that large
prokaryotic genomes contain many more genes than
smaller ones. By contrast, the human genome contains only twice as many genes as Drosophila. So how
can we account for the size diversity of prokaryotes?
When the different genomes are arranged in size
order (Fig. 18.1) some interesting features emerge.
First, the archaebacteria exhibit a very much smaller
range of genome sizes. This could be an artifact of
the small number of genomes examined but more
probably reflects the fact that most of them occupy
a specialized environment and have little need for
metabolic diversity. The exception is Methanosarcina
acetivorans. This bacterium is known to thrive in a
broad range of environments and at 5.8 Mb has
the largest archaeal genome (Galagan et al. 2002).
Second, the smallest eubacterial genomes are found
in those organisms that normally are found associated
with animals or humans, e.g. mycoplasmas, rickettsias, chlamydiae, etc. Those organisms that can

375

occupy a greater number of niches have a larger
genome size. Not surprisingly, there is a good correlation between genome size and metabolic and
functional diversity as demonstrated by the size of
the genomes of Bacillus and Streptomyces (formation
of spores, antibiotic synthesis), rhizobia (symbiotic
nitrogen fixation), and Pseudomonas (degradation of
a wide range of aromatic compounds).
The minimal gene set consistent with
independent existence can be determined
using comparative genomics
The genome of N. equitans is the smallest sequenced
to date (Waters et al. 2003) but this organism is an
obligate symbiont. This begs the question, what is
the minimal genome that is consistent with a freeliving cellular organism? In reality, this is a nonsensical question unless one specifies a defined set of
environmental conditions. Conceivably, the absolute
minimal set of genes will correspond to the most
favorable conditions possible in which all essential
nutrients are provided and there are no environmental stress factors. If one ignores functionally important RNA molecules and non-coding sequences, the
problem is one of defining the minimal protein set.
The first attempt at identifying the minimal protein set was made by compiling a list of orthologous
proteins in Hemophilus influenzae and M. genitalium
(Mushegian & Koonin 1996). The expectation was
that this list would predominantly contain proteins
integral for cell survival as both bacteria are essentially parasites and thus should have shed auxiliary
genes. Altogether 244 orthologs were identified but
this list is unlikely to be complete because of the
occurrence of non-orthologous gene displacements.
Some of these gene displacements can be inferred
because both organisms appear to have key metabolic pathways that are incomplete. In this way,
Mushegian (1999) extended the minimal protein
set to 256 genes.
The problem with the above approach is that if
one is too strict in defining the degree of similarity
between two proteins required to constitute orthologs
then the minimal protein set is greatly underestimated. A variation of the above method is to identify
orthologous groups, i.e. clusters of genes that include
orthologs and, additionally, those paralogs where
there has been selective gene loss following gene
duplication. When this approach was taken with
four eubacteria, one archaebacterium, and one yeast,
816 clusters of orthologous groups (COGs) were

376

Methanosarcina acetovorins

Methanosarcina mazei

Sulfolobus sulfotaricus

Sulfolobus tokadai

CHAPTER 18

Archaeabacteria

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Streptomyces avermitilis, S. coelicolor
Bradyrhizobium japonicum

Saccharopolyspora erythraea, Streptomyces coelicolor

Mesorhizobium loti

Nostoc, Pirellula

Sinorhizobium meliloti

6

Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacteroides thetaiotamicron

5

Pseudomonas putida

4

Escherichia coli 0157

Eubacteria

0

3

Bordetella pertussis
Caulobacter crescentus, Vibrio cholerae, Legionella pneumophila
Clostridium acetobutylicum
Bacillus subtilis, B. halodurans
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Escherichia coli K12, Shigella flexnerii
Yersinia pestis
Salmonella typhi
Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Salmonella typhimurium
Xanthomonas campestris

2

Synechocystis sp., Marinobacillus iheyensis

1

Xylella fastidiosa
Staphylococcus aureus
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeria innocua
Deinococcus radiodurans, Mycobacterium leprae, Corynebacterium glutamicum

0

13

Genome size (Mb)

Fig. 18.1 Genome sizes of archaebacteria, some eubacteria, and one eukaryote whose genomes have been completely
sequenced.

identified. Of these, 327 contained representatives of
all three kingdoms (Mushegian 1999). Based on this
set of 327 proteins it was possible to reconstruct all
the key biosynthetic pathways. When the analysis
was repeated with sequence data from an additional three archaebacteria and 12 eubacteria, the
minimal protein set was slightly reduced to 322
COGs.
Larger microbial genomes have more paralogs
than smaller genomes
Comparison of the P. aeruginosa (6.3 Mb) and E. coli
(4.5 Mb) genomes indicates that the large genome of

P. aeruginosa is the result of greater genetic complexity rather than differences in genome organization.
Distributions of open-reading frame (ORF) sizes and
inter-ORF spacings are nearly identical in the two
genomes. If the larger genome of P. aeruginosa arose
by recent gene duplication one would expect it
to have a similar number of paralogous groups
compared to the other large bacterial genomes
and a larger number of ORFs in each group. In fact,
the number of ORFs in the paralogous groups in
Pseudomonas is similar to the other genomes. Thus
selection for environmental versatility (Box 18.2)
has favored genetic capability through the development of numerous small paralogous gene families

Box 18.2 Correlation of genome sequence data with the biology of bacteria
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a bacterium that is
extremely versatile both ecologically and
metabolically. It grows in a wide variety of
habitats including soil, water, plant surfaces,
biofilms, and both in and on animals including
humans. A major problem with P. aeruginosa
is its resistance to many disinfectants and
antibiotics. Pseudomonads are characterized
by a limited ability to grow on carbohydrates
but a remarkable ability to metabolize many
other compounds including an astonishing
variety of aromatics.
Analysis of the genome of P. aeruginosa
(Stover et al. 2000) reveals a general lack of
sugar transporters and an incomplete
glycolytic pathway, both of which explain the
poor ability to grow on sugars. By contrast, it
has large numbers of transporters for a wide
range of metabolites and a substantial number
of genes for metabolic pathways not found in
many other bacteria such as E. coli. As might
be expected for an organism with great
metabolic versatility, a high proportion of the
genes (>8%) are involved in gene regulation.
The organism also has the most complex
chemosensory system of all the complete
bacterial genomes with four loci that encode
probable chemotaxis signal-transduction
pathways. Finally, sequencing revealed the
presence of a large number of undescribed
drug efflux systems which probably account
for the inherent resistance of the organism to
many antibacterial substances.
Caulobacter crescentus
Caulobacter crescentus is a bacterium that is
found in oligotrophic (very low nutrient)
environments and is not capable of growing
in rich media. Not surprisingly, genome
sequencing (Nierman et al. 2001) has shown
that the bacterium possesses a large number
of genes for responding to environmental
substrates. For example, 2.5% of the
genome is devoted to motility, there are
two chemotaxis systems and over 16
chemoreceptors. It also has 65 members
of the family of outer membrane proteins that
catalyze energy-dependent transport across
the membrane. By contrast, the metabolically
versatile P. aeruginosa has 32 and other
bacteria fewer than 10.
The bacterium also has an obligatory life
cycle involving asymmetric cell division and
differentiation (Fig. B18.2). Thus it comes as
no surprise that genome sequencing reveals a

Swarmer
cell

Stalked
mother cell

Fig. B18.2 The life cycle of Caulobacter crescentus.

very high number of two-component signaltransduction proteins, e.g. 34 histidine protein
kinase (HPK) genes, 44 response regulator
(RR) genes, and 27 hybrid (HPK/RR) genes.
In addition, the frequency of the GAnTC
target site for DNA methylation was much
less than would be expected if it occurred
at random.
Deinococcus radiodurans
This bacterium is remarkable for its ability to
survive extremely high doses of ionizing
radiation. For example, it can grow in the
presence of chronic radiation (6 kilorads/hour)
and withstand acute exposures to 1500
kilorads. The organism also is resistant to
dessication, oxidizing agents, and ultraviolet
radiation. These properties could be the result
of one or more of prevention, tolerance, and
repair. Genome sequencing (White et al.
1999, Makarova et al. 2001) has shown that
systems for the prevention and tolerance of
DNA damage are present but that the key
mechanism of resistance is an extremely
efficient DNA repair system. Although all
of the DNA repair genes identified in D.
radiodurans have functional homologs in
other prokaryotes, no other species has the
same high degree of gene redundancy. The
bacterium also has multiple genes for proteins
involved in exporting oxidation products of
nucleotides. Another important component
may be the presence of DNA repeat elements
scattered throughout the genome. These
repeats satisfy several expected requirements
for involvement in recombinational repair,
including that they are intergenic, they are
ubiquitous, and they occur at a frequency
that is comparable to the number of doublestranded DNA breaks that can be tolerated.

378

Organism
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Escherichia coli
Caulobacter crescentus
Hemophilus influenzae
Mycoplasma genitalium

CHAPTER 18

Genome size
relative to E. coli

Percentage of proteins
belonging to paralogs

1.4
1
0.88
0.38
0.12

75
50
48
35
26

whose members encode distinct functions. As a
general rule, one would expect that as the size of
the prokaryotic genome increases then the number
of paralogs also would increase, and this is what has
been observed (Table 18.1). Furthermore, the biochemical bias in these paralogs reflects the biology of
the host organism (Box 18.2).
Analysis of all the prokaryotic genomes sequenced
to date has revealed two intriguing observations.
First, almost half the ORFs identified are of unknown
biological function. This suggests that a number of
novel biochemical pathways remain to be identified.
Secondly, approximately 25% of all ORFs identified
are unique and have no significant sequence similarity to any other available protein sequence. Although
this might be an artifact of the small number of
bacterial species studied by whole-genome analysis,
it does support the observation of incredible biological diversity between bacteria. More importantly,
it indicates that there are large numbers of new
protein families yet to be discovered, e.g. over 1000
proteins in each of Bacillus subtilis, E. coli, and
Deinococcus radiodurans!
Because the DNA and protein sequence databases
are updated daily it pays to revisit them from time
to time to determine if homologs to previously
unidentified proteins have been found. It also pays
to re-examine sequence data as new and more
sophisticated bioinformatics tools are being developed. The benefits of this can be seen from the work
of Robinson et al. (1994). They re-examined 18 Mb
of prokaryotic DNA sequence and uncovered more
than 450 genes that had escaped detection. A more
specific example is that of Dandekar et al. (2000)
who re-examined the sequence data for Mycoplasma
pneumoniae. They identified an additional 12 ORFs
and eliminated one identified previously and found
an additional three RNA genes. They also shortened eight protein reading frames and extended 16
others.

Table 18.1
Relationship between
paralogs and
genome size.

Horizontal gene transfer may be a significant
evolutionary force but is not easy to detect
Horizontal, or lateral, gene transfer is the occurrence
of genetic exchange between different evolutionary
lineages. It is generally recognized that horizontal
gene transfer has occurred but there is considerable
debate about the extent of its occurrence. For
example, Gogarten et al. (2002) believe that it occurs
much more than has hitherto been recognized
whereas Kurland et al. (2003) feel that it has had
little influence on genome phylogeny. Now that so
many microbial genomes have been sequenced it
might be thought that detecting lateral gene transfer
would be easy but there are doubts about the validity
of some of the methods used to detect it. Basically,
two methods are used: the detection of sequences
with unusual nucleotide composition and the detection of a gene, or genes, for a function that is totally
absent in all closely related species. For example,
analysis of the genomes of two bacterial thermophiles indicated that 20–25% of their genes were
more similar to genes in archaeabacteria than those
of eubacteria (Aravind et al. 1998, Nelson et al.
1999). These archaeal-like genes occurred in clusters in the genome and had a markedly different
nucleotide composition and could have arisen by
horizontal gene transfer.
Garcia-Vallve et al. (2000) have developed a statistical procedure for predicting whether genes of a
complete genome have been acquired by horizontal
gene transfer. This procedure is based on analysis of
G + C content, codon usage, amino acid usage, and
gene position. When it was applied to 24 sequenced
genomes it suggested that 1.5–14.5% of genes had
been horizontally transferred and that most of
these genes were present in only one or two lineages.
However, Koski et al. (2001) have urged caution in
the use of codon bias and base composition to predict
horizontal gene transfer. They compared the ORFs

Comparative genomics

of E. coli and Salmonella typhi, two closely related
bacteria that are estimated to have diverged 100 million years ago. They found that many E. coli genes of
normal composition have no counterpart in S. typhi.
Conversely, many genes in E. coli have an atypical
composition and not only are also found in S. typhi,
but are found at the same position in the genome, i.e.
they are positional orthologs.
Karlin (2001) has defined genes as “putative
aliens” if their codon usage difference from the
average gene exceeds a high threshold and codon
usage differences from ribosomal protein genes and
chaperone genes also are high. Using this method, in
preference to variations in G + C content, he noted
that stretches of DNA with anomalous codon usage
were frequently associated with pathogenicity
islands. These are large stretches of DNA (35–200 kb)
that encode several virulence factors and are present
in all pathogenic isolates of a species and usually
absent from non-pathogenic isolates. Of particular relevance is that they encode an integrase,
are flanked by direct repeats, and insert into the
chromosome adjacent to tRNA genes (Hacker et al.
1997). In this respect, pathogenicity islands resemble temperate phages and could have been acquired
by new hosts by transduction (Boyd et al. 2001).
Alternatively, spread could have been achieved by
conjugative transposons. There are many other
putative examples of horizontal gene transfer (see
Gogarten et al. 2002, for a list) but the evidence
that transmission occurred in this way is much
scantier than for pathogenicity islands with the possible exception of RNA polymerase (Iyer et al. 2004).
The comparative genomics of closely related
bacteria gives useful insights into microbial
evolution
Now that so many microbial genomes have been
sequenced it is possible to undertake comparative
genomic studies between closely related bacteria
or distantly related bacteria. Both kinds of studies
are valuable because they reveal different kinds of
information. Studies on distantly related bacteria are
covered in the next section and here we cover only
studies on bacteria that are phylogenetically close.
The most detailed comparative analysis of related
bacteria has been undertaken on three genera of
the Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia, Shigella, and
Salmonella (Chaudhuri et al. 2004). Initially a comparison was made between one laboratory strain
of E. coli and two O157 enteropathogenic isolates

379

(Hayashi et al. 2001, Perna et al. 2001) and later this
was supplemented by inclusion of a uropathogenic
strain (Welch et al. 2002). These studies showed
that the genomic backbone is homologous but the
homology is punctuated by hundreds of lineagespecific islands of introgressed DNA scattered
throughout the genome. Also, the pathogenic strains
are 590–800 kb larger than the laboratory strain
and this size difference is caused entirely by variations in the amount of island DNA. Many of these
islands are at the same relative backbone position in
the different pathogens but the island sequences are
unrelated. A more surprising finding was that only
39% of the proteins that each strain encodes are common to all of the strains. Furthermore, the pathogen
genomes are as different from each other as each
pathogen is from the benign strain. A later analysis
of the genome of Shigella flexneri, a major cause
of dysentery, indicated that this bacterium has the
same genome structure as E. coli and even should be
considered as a distinct strain of E. coli rather than as
belonging to a different genus (Wei et al. 2003).
As noted earlier, distinctive codon usage is considered to be an indicator of horizontal gene transfer.
Analysis of the different E. coli genomes showed that
the islands had distinctly different codon usage and
a 3–4.5 fold higher use of certain rare codons. Of
the approximately 2000 genes that were found in
islands in the pathogens only about 10% of them
were shared. However, many of these shared genes
are related to genes associated with bacteriophages
or insertion sequences suggesting that they may have
been involved in horizontal gene transfer. Many of
the other, non-shared island genes encode known
pathogenicity determinants. When different uropathogenic strains are compared, e.g. ones responsible
for cystitis, pyelonephritis, and urosepsis, many of
their island genes are unique to one strain too. These
results suggest that both pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains of E. coli have evolved through a
complex process. The ancestral backbone genes that
define E. coli have undergone slow accumulation
of vertically acquired sequence changes but the
remainder of the genes may have been introduced by
numerous occurrences of horizontal gene transfer.
Salmonella species are considered to be close
relatives of E. coli and two serovars (S. typhi and
S. typhimurium) have been completely sequenced
(McClelland et al. 2001, Parkhill et al. 2001a)
and compared to the E. coli genome (Fig. 18.2), with
which they share extensive synteny. As would be
expected, the relationship between S. typhi and

380

CHAPTER 18

140
Present in S. typhi, absent from S. typhimurium
Present in S. typhimurium, absent from S. typhi

Present in S. typhi, absent from E. coli
Present in E. coli, absent from S. typhi

60

20

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

+
51 0
–5
46 5
–4
41 0
–4
36 5
–3
31 0
–3
26 5
–2

21

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

20

11

10

Number of events

100

2

60

Indel size (number of CDS)
100

1

Fig. 18.2 Distribution of insertions and deletions in S. typhi relative to E. coli and S. typhimurium. The graph shows number of
insertion–deletion events plotted against the size of the inserted or deleted element (shown as number of genes), clearly indicating
that most of the events involve a small number of genes. Values above the lines represent genes present in S. typhi; values below the
line represent genes absent in S. typhi. Dark bars show the comparison with S. typhimurium; light bars with E. coli. (Redrawn with
permission from Parkhill et al. 2001b.)

S. typhimurium is very much closer than between
S. typhi and E. coli, although there still are significant
differences. There are 601 genes (13.1%) that are
unique to S. typhi compared with S. typhimurium
and 479 genes (10.9%) unique to S. typhimurium
relative to S. typhi. By contrast, there are 1505
genes (32.7%) unique to S. typhi relative to E. coli
and 1220 genes (28.4%) unique to E. coli relative
to S. typhi. Another difference between S. typhi and
S. typhimurium is the presence of 204 pseudogenes
in the former and only 39 in the latter. In most cases
these pseudogenes are relatively recent because
they are caused by a single frameshift or stop codon.
It is worth noting that complete sequencing of
closely related genomes facilitates the detection of
pseudogenes. This is because a frame-shift or premature stop codon is only recognizable if the gene is colinear with a functional homologous gene in another
genome. One biological difference between the
two Salmonella serovars is that S. typhi only infects
humans, whereas S. typhimurium can infect a wide
range of mammals. This may be related to differences
in pseudogene content because many of the pseudogenes in S. typhi are in housekeeping functions and
virulence components.
The bacterium Bacillus anthracis is of much current interest as it is the causative agent of anthrax
and has been used as a bioterrorism agent. It has
long been considered to be closely related to B. cereus,
which can cause food poisoning, and B. thuringiensis,

which is pathogenic for certain insects. A comparative genomic analysis of these three strains has
shown that while they differ in their chromosomal
backbone the major differences in pathogenicity are
due to plasmid-borne genes (Radnedge et al. 2003,
Rasko et al. 2004, Hoffmaster et al. 2004). Originally
it was thought that B. cereus lacked the plasmids
pXO1 and pXO2 that respectively encode the lethal
toxin complex and the poly-gamma-glutamic acid
capsule, both of which are key virulence factors.
However, similar plasmids have been found in nonpathogenic B. cereus strains and only differ from the
corresponding ones from B. anthracis by the lack of a
pathogenicity island containing various toxin genes.
There have been a number of genomic comparisons made between different species of Mycobacterium.
Of these, the most interesting is that between M.
tuberculosis and M. leprae, the causative organisms of
tuberculosis and leprosy (Table 18.2). Of the 1604
ORFs in M. leprae, 1439 had homologs in M. tuberculosis. Most of the 1116 pseudogenes were translationally inert but also had functional counterparts in
M. tuberculosis. Even so, there has still been a massive gene decay in the leprosy bacillus. Genes that
have been lost include those for part of the oxidative
respiratory chain and most of the microaerophilic
and anaerobic ones plus numerous catabolic systems.
These losses probably account for the inability of
microbiologists to culture M. leprae outside of animals. At the genome organization level, 65 segments

381

Comparative genomics

Table 18.2
Comparison of the
genomes of two
Mycobacterium spp.
(Reproduced from
Cole et al. 2001.)

Feature
Genome size
G + C (%)
Protein coding (%)
Protein coding genes (No.)
Pseudogenes (No.)
Gene density (bp per gene)
Average gene length (bp)
Average unknown gene length (bp)

showed synteny but differ in their relative order
and distribution. These breaks in synteny generally
correspond to dispersed repeats, tRNA genes, or
gene-poor regions, and repeat sequences occur at
the junctions of discontinuity. These data suggest
that genome rearrangements are the result of
multiple recombination events between related
repetitive sequences.
Comparative analysis of phylogenetically
diverse bacteria enables common structural
themes to be uncovered
Certain structural themes start to emerge as more
and more bacterial genomes are sequenced and
comparisons made between these sequences. One
such theme is the presence of pathogenicity islands
in pathogens and their absence from non-pathogens.
Another is that chromosomal inversions in closely
related bacteria are most likely to occur around the
origin or terminus of replication (Eisen et al. 2000,
Suyama & Bork 2001). Finally, many genomes are
littered with prophages and prophage remnants but
the exact significance of these is not known.
The systematic comparison of gene order in bacterial and archaeal genomes has shown that there is
very little conservation of gene order between phylogenetically distant genomes. A corollary of this is
that whenever statistically significant conservation
of gene order is observed then it could be indicative of
organization of the genes into operons. Wolf et al.
(2001) undertook a comparison of gene order in all
the sequenced prokaryotic genomes and found a
number of potential operons. Most of these operons
encode proteins that physically interact, e.g. ribosomal proteins and ABC-type transporter cassettes.
More important, this analysis enabled functions to

Mycobacterium leprae

Mycobacterium
tuberculosis

3,268,203
57.79
49.5
1604
1116
2037
1011
338

4,411,532
65.61
90.8
3959
6
1114
1012
653

be assigned to genes based on predictions of operon
function (Chapter 23).
Comparative genomics can be used to analyze
physiological phenomena
The bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans is characterized by its ability to survive extremely high doses of
ionizing radiation. Although the complete genome
has been sequenced this has not been sufficient to
provide a convincing explanation for the observed
physiological phenotype (see Box 18.2, p. 377). Part
of the problem is that there are no other organisms
that exhibit the same degree of radiation resistance with which to make comparisons. However,
Makarova et al. (2003) have made more progress
with understanding the basis for hyperthermophily.
In this context, hyperthermophily is the ability to
grow at temperatures exceeding 75°C whereas thermophily is the ability to grow in the range 55–75°C.
Complete genome sequences were available for 11
hyperthermophiles including eight archaea from six
distinct lineages and three bacteria from diverse
phyla. Sequences also were available for 14 thermophiles. Initially a search was made for COGs
which met the following criteria:
1 The COGs must encode proteins and be found in
at least three hyperthermophiles.
2 The number of hyperthermophiles with a particular COG should be greater than the number of
mesophiles.
3 More than 50% of the organisms with a particular COG should be thermophiles.
Altogether, 290 COGs met the above search criteria
but most of them were found only in archaeal hyper-

382

CHAPTER 18

Known replication and
repair genes
Predicted DNA repair
genes
Translation related
genes
Transcription related
genes
Cellular processes
Metabolic functions

Fig. 18.3 Functions of the 58
COGs associated with
hyperthermophily. (Figure
reproduced from Makarova et al.,
2003, Trends in Genetics 19,
172–6, with permission from
Elsevier.)

General function
Uncharacterized protein

thermophiles. Therefore the search was refined so
that at least one eubacterial hyperthermophile had
to encode each COG. In this way 58 COGs were
identified as being associated with the hyperthermophilic phenotype. These COGs encode a variety of
different cellular functions (Fig. 18.3) and include
previously uncharacterized protein families.

Rickettsia

Arabidopsis

Marchantia
Jakoba
Reclinomonas

Comparative genomics of organelles
Mitochondrial genomes exhibit an amazing
structural diversity
Mitochondria are ubiquitous in eukaryotes and play
a key role in the generation of ATP through the
coupling of electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation. Although the function of mitochondria
is highly conserved the structure of the mitochondrial
genome exhibits remarkable variation in conformation and size (Fig. 18.4; see Burger et al. 2003 for
review). Whereas the mtDNAs of animals and fungi
are relatively small (15–20 kb), those of plants are
very large (200–2000 kb). Plant mitochondria
rival the eukaryotic nucleus, and especially the plant
nucleus, in terms of the C-value paradox they present: i.e. larger plant mitochondrial genomes do not
appear to contain more genes than smaller ones but
simply have more spacer DNA. Plant mitochondria
also have a large amount of DNA derived from the
chloroplast, the nucleus, viruses, and other unknown
sources. This process probably is facilitated by the
existence of an active, transmembrane potentialdependent mechanism of DNA uptake (Koulintchenko

Allomyces

Plasmodium
Homo
C. reinhardtii
S. pombe
C. eugametos
Chondrus
Phytophthora
Ochromonas
Acanthamoeba

Prototheca
Tetrahymena

Fig. 18.4 Size and gene content of mitochondrial genomes
compared with an α-Proteobacterial (Rickettsia) genome.
Circles and lines represent circular and linear genome
shapes, repectively. (Reprinted from Gray et al. 1999
by permission of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science.)

et al. 2003). The C-value paradox extends to plant–
animal comparisons, where the Arabidopsis mtDNA
is 20 times larger than human mtDNA but has less
than twice the number of genes (Fig. 18.5). Even
within a single genus, in this case different species
of the yeast Schizosaccharomyces, there can be a
four-fold variation in the amount of non-coding DNA
(Bullerwell et al. 2003).
As a result of the steady accumulation of sequence
data it now is evident that mtDNAs come in two
basic types. These have been designated as “ancestral” and “derived” (Gray et al. 1999) and their
characteristics are summarized in Table 18.3. It is
generally believed that mitochondria are the direct descendants of a bacterial endosymbiont that

383

Comparative genomics

400

Mitochondrial genoms size (kbp)

350

200

150

100

50

Ar

ab
i
Am dop
oe sis
b
M idiu
ar
m
ch
an
tia
Sa
cc Jako
ha
ba
r
Re omy
cli
c
no es
Rh mo
od na
om s
on
Ca as
fe
M teria
et
rid
iu
Ch
m
la
m Ho
yd m
om o
o
Pl
as nas
m
od
iu
m

0

Key:
Authentic mitochondrial genes
Introns, ORFs, plasmid-derived genes
Non-coding regions

Fig. 18.5 Mitochondrial genome size and coding content
across eukaryotes: length of coding regions of authentic
mitochondrial genes, introns, intronic ORFs, phage-like
reverse transcriptases, and DNA polymerases, and intergenic
regions. Species names are: Reclinomonas americana (jakobid
flagellate); Rhodomonas salina (cryptophyte alga); Marchantia
polymorpha (liverwort, bryophyte); Cafeteria roenbergensis
(stramenopile flagellate); Arabidopsis thaliana (flowering
plant, angiosperm); Homo sapiens (vertebrate animal);
Metridium senile (cnidarian animal); Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(ascomycete fungus); and Plasmodium falciparum
(apicomplexan protist). Amoebidium parasiticum
(ichthyosporean protist); Jakoba libera (jakobid flagellate);
and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (green alga, chlorophyte).
Reproduced from Burger et al., 2003, with permission from
Elsevier.

became established in a nucleus-containing cell
and an ancestral mitochondrial genome is one that
has retained clear vestiges of this eubacterial ancestry. The prototypal ancestral mtDNA is that of
Reclinomonas americana, a heterotrophic flagellated
protozoon. The mtDNA of this organism contains 97
genes including all the protein-coding genes found
in all other sequenced mtDNAs. Derived mitochondrial genomes are ones that depart radically from the
ancestral pattern. In animals and many protists this
is accompanied by a substantial reduction in overall
size and gene content. In plants, and particularly
angiosperms, there has been extensive gene loss but
size has increased as a result of frequent duplication
of DNA and the capture of sequences from the
chloroplast and nucleus (Marienfeld et al. 1999).
If mitochondria are derived from a bacterium,
what is the closest relative of that bacterium that
exists today? The current view is that it is Rickettsia
prowazekii, the causative agent of epidemic typhus.
This organism favors an intracellular lifestyle that
could have initiated the endosymbiotic evolution of
the mitochondrion. The genome of R. prowazekii has
been sequenced and the functional profile of its genes
shows similarities to mitochondria (Andersson et al.
1998). The structure, organization, and gene content of the bacterium most resemble those of the
mtDNA of Reclinomonas americana.
Gene transfer has occurred between mtDNA
and nuclear DNA
The principal function of the mitochondrion is the
generation of ATP via oxidative phosphorylation. At
least 21 genes encode proteins critical for oxidative
phosphorylation and one would expect all of these

Table 18.3 Properties of ancestral and derived mtDNAs. (Reprinted from Marienfeld et al. 1999 by permission of Elsevier
Science.)

Ancestral mtDNA
1 Many extra genes compared with animal mtDNA
2 rRNA genes that encode eubacteria-like 23S, 16S,
and 5S rRNAs
3 Complete, or almost complete, set of tRNA genes
4 Tight packing of genetic information with few
or no introns
5 Eubacterial-like gene clusters
6 Use standard genetic code

Derived mtDNA
1 Extensive gene loss
2 Marked divergence in rDNA and rRNA structure
3 Accelerated rate of sequence divergence in both
protein-coding and rRNA genes
4 Highly biased use of codons including, in some
cases, elimination of certain codons
5 Introduction of non-standard codon assignments

384

CHAPTER 18

100
90
80

Number of genes

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Rh

Re

cli

no
m
o
od na
om s
M on
a
ar
ch s
an
Cy
C ti
an afe a
t
id
io eria
sc
hy
z
Ar
ab on
id
op
M
s
on is
os
ig
a
H
M omo
e
Po trid
iu
di
Sa no m
cc mo
ha n
ro as
m
yc
Pl
es
as
m
od
iu
m

0

Key:
Respiration and oxidative phosphorylation
Ribosomal RNAs
Transfer RNAs
Ribosomal proteins and EF-Tu
Protein import and maturation
RNA maturation
Transcription

Fig. 18.6 Mitochondrial gene classes and their
representation across eukaryotes. Species names are:
Reclinomonas americana (jakobid flagellate); Rhodomonas
salina (cryptophyte alga); Marchantia polymorpha (liverwort,
bryophyte); Cafeteria roenbergensis (stramenopile flagellate);
Cyanidioschyzon merolae (red alga); Arabidopsis thaliana
(flowering plant, angiosperm); Monosiga brevicollis
(choanozoan flagellate); Homo sapiens (vertebrate animal);
Metridium senile (cnidarian animal); Pedinomonas minor
(green alga, chlorophyte); Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(ascomycete fungus); and Plasmodium falciparum
(apicomplexan protist). Reproduced from Burger et al.,
2003, with permission from Elsevier.

genes to be located in the mtDNA. Similarly, an
mtDNA location would be expected for the genes
encoding the 14 ribosomal proteins that are required
to translate mtRNA. However, sequence data indicate that many mitochondrial genomes lack a number of key genes (Fig. 18.6) and the missing genes
can be found in the nucleus. Functional transfer of
mitochondrial genes to the nucleus has stopped in
animals, hence their consistency in size. Part of the
reason for this is that further transfer is blocked by
changes in the mitochondrial genetic code. However,
this gene transfer continues to occur in plants and
protists because there is no genetic code barrier to
transfer. Note that it is not just intact genes that are

transferred for Woischnik & Moraes (2002) found
human mitochondrial pseudogenes in the nuclear
genome. Many of these pseudogenes comprised parts
of two adjacent mitochondrial genes.
In the case of the mitochondrial cox2 gene, transfer to the nucleus is still on-going in the case of the
legumes (Palmer et al. 2000). Analysis of 25 different
legumes identified some genera in which the cox2
gene was located in the mitochondrion, some in
which it was nuclear, and some where it was present
in both genomes. In most cases where two copies of
the gene are present, only one gene is transcriptionally active, although at least one genus was found in
which both genes are transcribed.
Adams et al. (2000a) studied the distribution of
the rps10 gene in 277 angiosperms and identified 26
cases where the gene has been lost from the mtDNA.
In 16 of these loss lineages, the nuclear gene was
characterized in detail. To be active in the nucleus, a
gene acquired from mtDNA must be inserted into
the nuclear genome in such a way that a mature
translatable mRNA can be produced. Moreover, the
resulting protein is made in the cytoplasm and must
be targeted to and imported into mitochondria. What
emerged was that in some cases pre-existing copies
of other nuclear genes have been parasitized with
the rps10 coding sequence. In several instances a
mitochondrial targeting sequence has been co-opted
to provide entry for the RPS10 protein back into
the mitochondrion but different nuclear genes provide this sequence in different plants. In other cases,
the RPS10 protein is imported despite the absence
of an obvious targeting sequence. These results,
and similar findings for other mitochondrial genes
(Adams et al. 2001), provide confirmation that
nuclear transfer is on-going and has happened on
many separate occasions in the past. Nor is nuclear
transfer confined to mitochondrial genes for Millen
et al. (2001) have made similar observations with
chloroplast genes. Henze & Martin (2000) have
reviewed the mechanisms whereby this transfer
can occur.
Horizontal gene transfer has been detected in
mitochondrial genomes
In the previous section we discussed intracellular
horizontal evolution whereby genes moved between
the mitochondrion and the nucleus. However, crossspecies acquisition of DNA by plant mitochondrial
genomes also has been detected. The first example
detected was that of a homing group I intron (Palmer

Comparative genomics

et al. 2000). These introns encode site-specific endonucleases with relatively long target sites that catalyze their efficient spread from intron-containing
alleles to intron-lacking alleles of the same gene in
genetic crosses. This intron has been detected in the
mitochondrial cox1 gene of 48 angiosperms out of
281 tested. Based on sequence data for the intron
and the host genome, it appears that this intron has
been independently acquired by cross-species horizontal transfer to the host plants on many separate
occasions. What is not clear are the identities of the
donor and recipient in each individual case. By contrast with this group I intron, the 23 other introns in
angiosperm mtDNA belong to group II and all are
transmitted in a strictly vertical manner.
More recently, Bergthorsson et al. (2003) have
reported widespread horizontal transfer of mitochondrial genes between distantly related angiosperms, including between monocotyledonous and
dicotyledenous plants. The genomic consequences
of these mtDNA-to-mtDNA transfers include gene
duplication, recapture of genes previously lost
through transfer to the nucleus, and a chimeric
(half-monocot, half-dicot) ribosomal protein gene.

Comparative genomics of eukaryotes
The minimal eukaryotic genome is smaller
than many bacterial genomes
In determining the minimal genome we are seeking
to answer a number of different questions. What is
the minimal size of the genome of a free-living unicellular eukaryote and how does it compare with the
minimal bacterial genome? That is, what are the
fundamental genetic differences between a eukaryotic and a prokaryotic cell? Next, what additional
genetic information does it require for multicellular
coordination? In animals, what are the minimum
sizes for a vertebrate genome and a mammalian
genome? Finally, what is the minimum size of
genome for a flowering plant? Given that many
eukaryotic genomes contain large amounts of noncoding DNA these questions have to be answered
by considering both genome size and the number of
proteins that are encoded.
The smallest eukaryotic genome that has been
sequenced is that of the obligate intracellular parasite Encephalitozoon cuniculi (Katinka et al. 2001).
This has a genome size of only 2.9 Mb although its
close relative E. intestinalis may have a genome that

385

is even smaller (2.3 Mb). Genome compaction in
these organisms is achieved by a reduction in the
length of intergenic spacers and a shortness of most
putative proteins relative to their orthologs in other
eukaryotes. Even so, E. cuniculi has approximately
2000 ORFs, which is 7–8 times the number in the
minimal bacterial genome. The genome of the yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe has about 4800 ORFs
(Wood et al. 2002) but is unlikely to represent the
minimal free-living eukaryotic genome unless the
E. cuniculi genome has lost many more essential genes than those metabolic and biosynthetic
ones already recognized. The multicellular fungus
Neurospora crassa has approximately 10,000 ORFs
(Galagan et al. 2003), about 25% fewer than the
fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster (Adams et al. 2000b).
Many of these genes do not have homologs in either
Saccharomyces cerevisiae or S. pombe (Borkovich et al.
2004) but exactly how many of them are essential
for multicellular existence remains to be seen.
Comparative genomics can be used to identify
genes and regulatory elements
As noted in Chapter 9 accurately identifying genes in
a complete genome sequence can be very difficult
and identifying regulatory elements can be even
harder still. A powerful method for finding functional elements such as genes and regulatory regions
is to align orthologous genomic sequences from
different species and search out regions of sequence
conservation. The rationale for this approach is that
mutations in functional DNA will be deleterious and
thus counter-selected thereby resulting in a reduced
rate of evolution of functional elements. The two
most important factors affecting the results of a comparative analysis are the amount of divergence being
captured and the phylogenetic scope of the aligned
sequences (Cooper & Sidow 2003). The amount of
divergence affects the power and resolution of the
analyses. The scope, which is defined as the narrowest taxonomic group that encompasses all analyzed
sequences, affects the applicability of conclusions
and the generality of the results. For example, a
dipteran scope that includes Drosophila (fruitfly) and
Anopheles (mosquito) can be used to find elements
that were present in their common ancestor as
well as ones present before the diversification of
hexapods, arthropods, and metazoa (Fig. 18.7).
An example of a comparative analysis with a narrow scope is the genomic comparison of S. cerevisiae
with three other species of Saccharomyces (Kellis et al.

386

CHAPTER 18

Human
Mammalian traits,
e.g. mammary glands

Mouse

Vertebrate traits,
e.g. backbone, jaws
Tetrapod traits
Metazoan traits,
e.g. multicellularity

Zebrafish

Teleost traits
Fugu

Arthropod traits, e.g.
jointed appendages
Drosophila

Insect traits,
e.g. hexapodia

Dipteran traits,
e.g. halteres

Anopheles

Fig. 18.7 The importance of scope and the impact of shared ancestry on comparative sequence analysis. The tree describing the
relationships among six actively studied genomes is drawn in light purple (not to scale). Each colored line indicates the phylogenetic
scope that applies to each pair of species at the terminal nodes: gray line, placental mammal scope; black line, teleost scope; dark
purple line, dipteran scope. Overlaps of the colored lines indicate shared ancestry and capture traits shared by the indicated scopes
and, by implication, shared functional elements. Open circles and associated text show various traits that exemplify the major
animal clades and the branch of the tree on which they arose. Reproduced from Cooper et al. (2003), with permission from Elsevier.

2003). The gene analysis resulted in a major revision of the S. cerevisiae gene catalog that affected
15% of all genes, reduced the total count by about
500 genes, and identified 43 new small ORFs (50–
99 amino acids). This latter finding is particularly
significant since small ORFs can only be considered
putative genes in the absence of function or conservation in different species. A comparative analysis with a more divergent scope is that between
the pufferfish (Fugu rubripes) and human genomes
(Aparicio et al. 2002). This identified almost 1000
putative genes that had not been identified in the
two published reports on the human genome
sequence.
The direct identification of regulatory elements is
very difficult since they are short (6–15 bp), tolerate
some degree of sequence variation, and follow few
known rules. Computational analysis of single
genome sequences has been used successfully to
identify regulatory elements such as promoters
associated with known sets of genes. However, this
approach is of relatively little value in identifying
other regulatory elements involved in gene expression (enhancers, silencers) and chromatin organiza-

tion (insulators, matrix attachment regions). As the
examples below show, comparative analysis is much
more useful in this respect. Comparisons within a
narrow scope are particularly useful as they permit
almost the entire genome to be scanned for regulatory regions. In this way Kellis et al. (2003) were
able to recognize an additional nine regulatory protein motifs in addition to the 42 that were already
known.
Enhancers are regulatory elements that upregulate gene expression by sequence-specific positioning
of transcriptional activators. Enhancers can function
independently of position and orientation although
they generally are located within hundreds of
kilobases of their target genes. Using comparative
analysis, Spitz et al. (2003) discovered a cluster of
enhancer elements that are conserved between
mammals and Fugu. These enhancers coordinate
expression between Hoxd genes and nearby genes
that are evolutionarily unrelated.
Silencers are elements that are capable of
repressing transcription. Many are found near their
corresponding promoter but there are other types.
Sequencing of the chicken CD4 gene showed that it

387

Comparative genomics

14 000

12000

10000
Number of proteins

Fig. 18.8
Assignment of proteins
from each of the seven
analyzed eukaryotic
genomes to KOGs with
different numbers of
species and to LSEs.
0, Proteins without
detectable homologs
(singletons); 1, LSEs.
Species abbreviations:
Ath, Arabidopsis
thaliana; Cel,
Caenorhabditis elegans;
Dme, Drosophila
melanogaster; Ecu,
Encephalitozoon cuniculi;
Hsa, Homo sapiens;
Sce, Saccharomyces
cerevisisae; Spo,
Schizosaccharomyces
pombe.

8000

6000

4000
Hsa
Dme
Cel
Ath
Spo
Sce
Ecu

2000

0
0

is similar to the mammalian CD4 gene and has a
functional human silencer (Koskinen et al. 2002).
This level of distant conservation suggests that this
silencer has a fundamental role in controlling gene
expression.
Insulator elements are barriers that separate
domains within chromatin and confine the actions
of regulatory elements to their appropriate targets.
They can block the action of enhancers as well as
prevent the spread of chromatin condensation from
nearby regions. Farrell et al. (2002) discovered conserved genomic regions that flank the β-globin loci
in mouse and man. These regions contain binding
sites for CTCF, a protein known to be important for
enhancer-blocking insulator activity.
Matrix attachment regions (MARs) are regions of
DNA that are involved in the binding to the nuclear
matrix. Glazko et al. (2003) aligned intergenic
sequences from mouse and man and identified conserved segments. Further analysis showed that 11%
of these had sequence motifs characteristic of MARs
and that many of them precede the 5′ ends of genes.
This latter observation suggests a role in regulating
transcription.
Comparative genomics gives insight into the
evolution of key proteins
Koonin et al. (2004) have undertaken a comprehensive evolutionary classification of the proteins encoded

1

2

3

4

5

Number of species in KOGs

6

7

in seven completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes:
three animals (man, nematode, and fruitfly), one plant
(Arabidopsis), a budding yeast, a fission yeast, and the
microsporidian E. cuniculi. In particular, they looked
for eukaryotic clusters of orthologous groups (KOGs)
and the results are shown in Fig. 18.8. The fraction
of proteins assigned to KOGs tends to decrease with
increasing genome size, except for the obligate parasite E. cuniculi. By contrast, lineage-specific expansions of paralogous groups show the opposite trend
with the largest numbers being in the higher eukaryotes. Only a minority of KOGs have readily detectable
prokaryotic counterparts, indicating the extent of
innovation linked to the origin of eukaryotes.
A total of 131 KOGs were represented by a single
gene in each of the seven genomes. Since these KOGs
are present in the minimal genome of E. cuniculi they
must encode core biological functions. Nearly all
of them encode subunits of known multiprotein
complexes and many of them are involved in rRNA
processing, ribosome assembly, intron splicing, transcription, and protein assembly and trafficking.
The evolution of species can be analyzed at
the genome level
The yeasts Saccharomyces paradoxus, S. mikatae, and
S. bayanus are estimated to have separated from
S. cerevisiae 5–20 million years ago. The genomes of
all four have been sequenced and Kellis et al. (2003)

388

Species
S. paradoxus
S. mikatae
S. bayanus

CHAPTER 18

Reciprocal
Translocations

Inversions

Segmental
Duplications

0
4
5

4
13
3

3
0
0

have undertaken a comparative analysis. They found
a high level of “genomic churning” in the vicinity
of the telomeres and gene families in these regions
showed significant changes in number, order, and
orientation. Only a few rearrangements were seen
outside of the telomeric regions and these are
summarized in Table 18.4. All 20 inversions were
flanked by tRNA genes in opposite transcriptional
orientation and usually these were of the same isoacceptor type. The role of tRNA genes in genomic
inversion has not been noted before. Of the nine
translocations, seven occurred between Ty elements
and two between highly similar pairs of ribosomal
genes.
At the gene level, five genes were unique to
S. paradoxus, eight genes unique to S. mikatae, and 19
unique to S. bayanus. Most of them encoded functions involved in sugar metabolism or gene regulation. The majority (86%) of these unique genes were
located near a telomere or a Ty element, locations
that are consistent with rapid genome evolution.
One gene was identified that appears to be evolving
very rapidly and across the four species showed 32%
nucleotide identity and 13% amino acid identity.
Functionally it appears to be involved in sporulation,
which in yeast is a stage in sexual reproduction. In
this regard, it is consistent with the observation that
many of the best-studied examples of positive selection in other organisms are genes related to gamete
function. One gene also was identified that showed
perfect 100% conservation at the amino acid and
the nucleotide level. The latter observation is very
unusual given the redundancy of the genetic code
and suggests that the gene might encode an antisense RNA.
Analysis of dipteran insect genomes permits
analysis of evolution in multicellular
organisms
The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and the malaria
mosquito Anopheles gambiae are both highly adapted,

Table 18.4
Genomic
rearrangements in
three yeast species
when compared with
S. cerevisiae.

Table 18.5 Genome statistics for the mosquito and
fruit fly.

Genome size
Total exon length
Total intron length
Average introns per
gene
Average amino
acids per protein

Anopheles

Drosophila

278 Mb
10 Mb
22.6 Mb
3.5

165 Mb
13.6 Mb
12.9 Mb
4.7

548

649

successful dipteran species that diverged about 250
million years ago. They share a similar body plan
and a considerable number of other features but differ in terms of ecology, morphology, and life style.
For example, Drosophila feeds on decaying fruit
while Anopheles feeds on the blood of specific hosts.
A number of obvious differences can be seen at the
whole-genome level (Table 18.5) but these give little
insight into the evolutionary process.
When the two genomes are compared at the
protein level (Zdobnov et al. 2002) five classes of
protein can be recognized (Fig. 18.9). A total of 6089
orthologs were identified in the two species and their
average sequence identity was 56%. By contrast there
is 61% sequence identity of orthologs between the
pufferfish and humans, which diverged 450 million
years ago. This indicates that insect proteins diverge
at a higher rate than vertebrate proteins. This could
be because insects have a much shorter life cycle and
may experience different selective pressures. When
the orthologs are classified according to gene ontology it is not surprising to find that the proteins
involved in immunity show the greatest divergence
and structural proteins are the most conserved.
The “many-to-many” orthologs shown in Fig. 18.9
represent groups of genes in which gene duplication
has occurred in one or both species after divergence,

389

Comparative genomics

(a)

(b)

14,000
18.6%

12,000

10.3%

Number of proteins

10,000

15.9%

8000
6000

11.1%
10.0%
17.9%

11.0%

13.8%

44.2%

47.2%

4000
Ag
Dm

2000
0
0

Drosophila Anopheles
melanogaster gambiae

200

400

600

800

Average protein size (aa)

Species specific, no significant hits to other species
Homologs, best hit in non-insect species
Homologs, best hit in insects
Many-to-many orthologs, incl. recent duplications
1:1 orthologs
(c)

400
200
0
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Sequence identity
(d)

Structural molecules (140)
Transporters (297)
Enzymes (1405)
Ligand binding or carrier (580)
Chaperones (40)
Nucleic acid binding (577)
Motor proteins (46)
Transcription regulators (281)
Enzyme regulators (70)
Signal transducers (303)
Defense and immunity (56)
UNKNOWN (3358)
0%

20%

i.e. paralogy. These, and the homologs, probably
represent adaptations to environment and life strategies leading to changes in cellular and phenotypic
features. For example, four Anopheles paralogs without a counterpart in Drosophila are similar to the
human gene encoding leukotriene B4 12-hydroxy
dehydrogenase, an enzyme that can inactivate the
proinflammatory leukotriene B4. The anopheline
mosquito may have acquired this gene to facilitate
the taking of a blood meal. A total of 579 orthologs
were restricted to Anopheles and Drosophila and did

40%

Sequence identities within
GO functional categories

Fig. 18.9 Analysis
of the proteome of
Anopheles gambiae
(Ag) and Drosophila
melanogaster (Dm).
(a) Classification of
the proteins according
to their conservation.
(b) Plot of the average
protein length for each
protein class in A.
(c) Histogram of the
sequence identities of
the 1:1 orthologs. (d)
Sequence conservation
of the 1:1 orthologs by
functional category.
Reprinted with
permission from
Zdobnov et al. (2002),
Copyright (2002)
AAAS.

Orthologous pairs

600

60%

80%

100%

Sequence identity

not even share domains with proteins identified
in the other organisms whose genomes have been
sequenced. Most of those that could be annotated
encoded specific odorant and taste receptors, cuticle
proteins, pheromone and pheromone-binding proteins, and insect-specific defense molecules.
The dynamics of gene evolution can be analyzed
by comparing the intron and exon structure of
the 1:1 orthologs. For example, equivalent introns
in Drosophila have only half the length of those
in Anopheles whereas exon lengths and intron

390

CHAPTER 18

Anopheles gambiae

Drosophila melanogaster

3R
2L

X
2L

3L

Given that the two diptera being studied are
estimated to have diverged 250 million years ago
one would expect that, in addition to changes in
exon/intron structure, there would be significant
variations in genome structure. Indeed, the gene
order of the 1:1 orthologs has only been retained
over very small distances and this is referred to
as microsynteny. However, at the macro level,
chromosomal arms exhibit significant remnants of
homology between the two species and major interarm transfers and intra-arm shuffling of gene order
can be detected (Fig. 18.10).
A number of mammalian genomes have been
sequenced and the data is facilitating analysis
of evolution

2R
X

3R

3L

2R

Fig. 18.10 Homology of chromosomal arms in insects.
Each chromosomal arm is marked by a color shown around
its name (pairs of chromosomes with significant homology,
such as Dm2L/Ag3R, use the same color). Coloring inside
the schematic chromosome arms denotes microsynteny
matches to a region in the other species; the color shown is
the color of the chromosome containing the matching region
in the other species. Reprinted with permission from Zdobnov
et al. (2002). Copyright (2002) AAAS. Full-color version
available at www.blackwellpublishing.com/primrose

frequencies are roughly similar. Approximately 55%
of Anopheles introns in 1:1 orthologs have equivalent
positions in Drosophila but almost 10,000 introns
have been lost or gained between the two species.
The rate of gain or loss of introns has been calculated
to be one per gene per 125 million years.

The genomes of humans, the mouse, and the rat
have been completely sequenced and good progress is being made with the genome of the chimpanzee (International Human Genome Sequencing
Consortium 2001, Venter et al. 2001, Mouse
Genome Sequencing Consortium 2002, Rat Genome
Sequencing Project Consortium 2004, The International Chimpanzee Chromosome 22 Consortium
2004). Figure 18.11 shows an analysis of the three
completely sequenced genomes. About 1 billion
nucleotides (40% of rat genome) align in all three
species and this “ancestral core” contains 94–95%
of the known coding exons and regulatory regions,
which in turn represent 1–2% of the genome. A further 30% of the rat genome aligns only with the
mouse genome and consists largely of rodent-specific
repeats. A further 15% of the rat genome comprises
rat-specific repeats. More genomic changes have
been detected in the rodent lineages than in the
human. These include approximately 250 large
rearrangements between a hypothetical rodent
ancestor and human, approximately 50 between
this ancestor and rat, and a similar number between
the ancestor and the mouse.
The rat, mouse, and human genomes encode similar numbers of genes and the majority have persisted
without deletion or duplication since the last common ancestor. About 90% of the genes have strict
orthologs in all three genomes but, compared with
humans, the rodents have expanded gene families
for functions associated with reproduction, immunity, olfaction, and metabolism of xenobiotics. These
features are not surprising given what we know about
rodent biology! Almost all the human genes known

Comparative genomics

Rat
2500 Mb

115

88

209

378

298

38

30

Mouse
2400 Mb

173

358

319

825
24

22
81
2

116

13
3
33

162

43

386
471

23

681

Human 2800 Mb
Genomic
DNA

Rat

Mouse

Human

Repetitive
DNA

Ancestral to
human–mouse–rat

Ratspecific

Primatespecific

Ancestral to
mouse–rat

Mousespecific

Simple

Fig. 18.11 Aligning portions and origins of sequences in
rat, mouse, and human genomes. Each outlined ellipse is a
genome, and the overlapping areas indicate the amount of
sequence that aligns in all three species (rat, mouse, and
human) or in only two species. Non-overlapping regions
represent sequence that does not align. Types of repeats
classified by ancestry: those that predate the human–rodent
divergence, those that arose on the rodent lineage before the
rat–mouse divergence, species-specific, those that are ratspecific, mouse-specific, human-specific and simple, each
indicated as shown in the key and placed to illustrate the
approximate amount of each type in each alignment
category. Uncolored areas are non-repetitive DNA – the bulk
is assumed to be ancestral to the human–rodent divergence.
Numbers of nucleotides (in Mb) are given for each sector (type
of sequence and alignment category). Reproduced with
permission from Nature.

to be associated with disease have orthologs in the
rat and mouse genomes but there is one surprising
finding. Many SNPs causing disease in man are found
in mice but these mice are phenotypically normal.
The comparison of the human genome with that
of the chimpanzee is perhaps the most interesting of
all the genomic comparisons that can be made, as
the chimpanzee is our closest living relative. In particular, comparative analysis should help to uncover

391

the genetic basis of cognitive function, bipedalism,
and speech development. At the time of writing the
complete chimpanzee genome was not available but
the 33.3 Mb sequence of chromosome 22 had been
completed (The International Chimpanzee Chromosome 22 Consortium 2004). Nearly 1.5% of the
chimpanzee genome had single base substitutions
when compared with its human equivalent (chromosome 21) in addition to approximately 68,000
insertions or deletions. These differences are sufficient to generate changes in most of the 231 coding
sequences. In addition, different expansion of particular subfamilies of retrotransposons was observed
between the different lineages, suggesting different
impacts of retrotransposition on human and chimpanzee evolution. The full impact of these changes
remains to be deciphered.
Comparative genomics can be used to
uncover the molecular mechanisms that
generate new gene structures
The comparative analyses described in the previous
sections indicate that there is a general process of
new gene origination. This raises the question of the
origin of these new genes. Several molecular mechanisms are known to be involved in the creation of
new gene structures (Fig. 18.12) and can operate
singly or in combination (Long et al. 2003). A good
example is jingwei, the first identified gene that
has originated recently (2 My) in the evolutionary
timescale (Fig. 18.13). This gene arose in the common ancestor of two Drosophila species. The starting
point was the yellow emperor gene that duplicated to
give the yellow emperor and yande genes. Whereas
yellow emperor maintained its original functions,
yande underwent modification. In particular, mRNA
of the alcohol dehydrogenase gene retroposed into
the third intron of yande as a fused exon and recombined with the first three yande exons. This formed
jingwei, a gene that is translated into a chimeric
protein.
Once created, new genes such as jingwei may
become modified beyond recognition. Examples of
this kind of change include domains involved in
protein–protein interactions such as von Willebrand
A, fibronectin type III, immunoglobulin, and SH3
modules (Ponting et al. 2000). These domains show
extensive proliferation in higher eukaryotes but
have only a distant relationship to homologs in
prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes.

392

CHAPTER 18

(a)

(b)
Exons
Duplication

Divergence

(c)

(d)
Organism A

Transfer
Organism B

Fission

Fusion

Divergence

(e)

(f)
Promoter A

Mobile
element
Exon

mRNA
Reverse transcription
and insertion at new site

Promoter B

New splice sites evolve

Other TE sequences
degenerate

Fig. 18.12 Mechanisms whereby new genes arise. (a) exon capture (exon shuffling); (b) duplication of a gene followed by
sequence divergence of the duplicate; (c) divergence of a gene following transfer to a new host; (d) fusion of two separate genes or
separation of two fused activities; (e) movement of a gene sequence via an mRNA intermediate followed by coupling to a promoter;
(f) capture of a transposable element (TE) followed by degeneration of the TE sequences. Real examples of these mechanisms can be
found in the review of Long et al. (2003).

Comparative genomics

Duplication of yellow emperor gene

yellow emperor and yande genes

Retroposition of alcohol dehydrogenase gene into yande

Recombination of exons in 5’ part of yande and Adh plus
degeneration of 3’ part of yande to create jingwei

Fig. 18.13 Genomic events leading to the formation of the
new gene jingwei.

Suggested reading
Kellis M., Patterson N., Endrizzi M., et al. (2003)
Sequencing and comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements. Nature 423,
241–54.
This is rapidly becoming a classic paper on the use of comparative genomics to decipher genome sequences but it also
provides insights to the genomic changes that exist between
species.
Koonin E.V. (2003) Comparative genomics, minimal
gene-sets and the last universal common ancestor.
Nature Reviews Microbiology 1, 127–36.
Koonin E.V., Federova N.D., Jackson J.D., et al. (2003)
A comprehensive evolutionary classification of
proteins encoded in complete eukaryotic genomes.
Genome Biology 5, R7.

393

Eugene Koonin probably knows more than anyone about
extracting evolutionary information from sequence databases. The two papers cited above are but a tiny sample of his
analyses.
Koonin E.V. (2005) Virology: Gulliver among the
Lilliputians. Current Biology 15, R167–9.
An analysis of the genome of a virus that is much bigger
than many parasitic bacteria.
Long M., Betran E., Thornton K. & Wang W. (2003)
The origin of new genes: glimpses from the young
and old. Nature Reviews Genetics 4, 865–75.
This is one of the few reviews that attempt to discuss where
new genes come from.
Paterson A.H., Bowers J.E., Chapman B.A., et al. (2004)
Comparative genome analysis of monocots and dicots,
towards characterization of angiosperm diversity.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 15, 120–5.
Pedulla M.L., Ford M.E., Houtz J.M., et al. (2003) Origins
of highly mosaic mycobacteriophage genomes. Cell
113, 171–82.
These two papers cover topics not discussed in this chapter,
the comparative genomics of plants and viruses respectively,
and are well worth reading.
Each year, the January 1 issue of Nucleic Acids Research
is devoted to short reviews of the different molecular
biology and genomics databases. A considerable
number of these databases are for the purposes of
comparative genomics and all are linked to relevant
websites. An example is given below.

Useful website
http://colibase.bham.ac.uk
This is the website for coliBASE, an online database for
the comparative genomics of E. coli and its close relatives. Now that a number of different strains of E. coli
have been completely sequenced it is clear that there is
much more genomic heterogeneity than expected.

CHAPTER 19
Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

Introduction
One of the most powerful ways to determine the
function of a gene is to mutate it and study the resulting phenotype. In this respect, the link between gene
and function can be approached from two directions.
Traditional “forward genetics” involves random mutagenesis followed by screening to recover mutants
showing impairment for a particular biological process. The essence of forward genetics is that one
starts by identifying a mutant phenotype and then
works towards the gene by mapping and cloning.
“Reverse genetics” is the opposite approach, where
one starts with a cloned gene whose function is
unknown. This gene is mutated deliberately and
the effect analyzed. In the post-genomics era, both
forward and reverse genetics are being developed
as high-throughput tools for the functional mapping
of genomes (Hamer et al. 2001, Ramachandran &
Sundaresan 2001, Nagy et al. 2003, Friedman &
Perrimon 2004).
There are three basic strategies, which we will
explore in turn. The first is the systematic approach
of deliberately mutating every single gene in the genome, one at a time, and generating banks of specific
mutant strains. This can only yield a comprehensive
mutant library if the entire genome sequence is available. The second is a random approach in which genes
are mutated indiscriminately. Individual mutations
are then cataloged by obtaining flanking sequence
tags, and genes are annotated by matching the tags
to entries in sequence databases. This method can
be applied to any species, even if there is little or no
existing sequence information. Moreover, in species
with complete or well-advanced genome projects,
random mutagenesis may uncover genes that have
been missed by other annotation methods. Each
of these strategies has further advantages and disadvantages. For example, although the systematic
approach provides exhaustive genome coverage, it
is a labor-intensive process and depends on preexisting sequence information. The random mutagenesis approach is rapid and relatively inexpensive,

but there is no control over the distribution of mutations so saturation may be difficult to achieve. The
third approach encompasses a group of techniques
that generate functional phenocopies of mutant alleles, i.e. the likeness of a mutation without actually
altering the DNA sequence of the organism. The
most widely used method in this category is RNA
interference (Friedman & Perrimon 2004).

Genome-wide gene targeting is the
systematic approach to large-scale
mutagenesis
Mutations can be introduced into predefined genes in
vivo through a process termed gene targeting, which
involves homologous recombination (Chapter 13).
Where the aim is to inactivate the target gene completely and generate a null allele, the term gene knockout is often used. Homologous recombination occurs
to a greater or lesser degree in all organisms, but
the efficiency varies considerably. In bacteria and
yeast, and also in the moss Physcomitrella patens,
the process is highly efficient and gene transfer with
a suitable targeting vector results in homologous
recombination more than 90% of the time. Since
microbial genomes also contain fewer genes than
those of higher eukaryotes, these species are ideally
suited to a functional genomics strategy based on
systematic gene knockouts.
Homologous recombination in higher eukaryotes
occurs at a much lower efficiency. Even if a homologous target is available in the genome, DNA introduced into most animal and plant cells is 100,000
times more likely to integrate randomly than recombine with its target. Until very recently, the only
higher eukaryote species that was amenable to genetargeting technology was the mouse (reviewed by
Muller 1999), and this is due to the special properties
of embryonic stem (ES) cells. As discussed in Chapter 13, ES cells can be cultured like any established
cell line, but they are derived from the very early
mouse embryo and are therefore pluripotent. This

Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

means that if the cells are injected into a mouse blastocyst they can colonize the embryo and contribute
to all its tissues, including the germline. The other
important property of ES cells is that they have an
unusual propensity for homologous recombination.
Although random integration still occurs 1000-fold
more frequently, PCR-based screening or appropriate
selection strategies can be use to identify correctly
targeted cells. These can be injected into mouse blastocysts to give rise to genetic chimeras. If colonization of the germline has occurred in these animals,
their offspring will carry the targeted mutation in
every cell. More recently, gene targeting has also
been achieved in Drosophila using a combination of
homologous and site-specific recombination (Rong
& Golic 2000), in sheep and pigs by gene targeting
in somatic cells followed by nuclear transfer to enucleated eggs (McCreath et al. 2000, Dai et al. 2002,
Lai et al. 2002, Phelps et al. 2003), and in human ES
cells (Zwaka & Thomson 2003). Gene targeting has
also been achieved in plants, albeit at a low efficiency
in most species (e.g. Kempin et al. 1997). The exceptions are the moss Physcomitrella patens, and rice
(Chapter 14).
The only organism in which systematic gene
targeting has been achieved is the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
The genome of S. cerevisiae contains about 6000
open-reading frames, which by comparison to higher
eukaryotes is a small number. Since the yeast genome
has been completely sequenced, several systematic
gene knockout projects have been initiated, one by
a consortium of European research organizations
named the European Functional Analysis Network
(EUROFAN) (Dujon 1998) and another by a consortium of US and European laboratories named
the Saccharomyces Gene Deletion Project consortium
(Winzeler et al. 1999). The EUROFAN project involves
the use of PCR-generated targeting cassettes in
which a selectable marker is placed between ~50 bp
elements corresponding to the flanking sequences
of each yeast gene. Targeting with such constructs
results in the replacement of the entire endogenous
coding region with the marker, thus generating a null
allele (Baudin et al. 1993). The Saccharomyces Gene
Deletion Project consortium has generated similar
targeting cassettes corresponding to about 96% of
yeast genes (Winzeler et al. 1999, Giaever et al. 2002).
Each contains, in addition to the selectable marker
and yeast flanking sequences, two unique 20-bp
“barcodes” placed just inside the yeast homology

395

Fig. 19.1 Barcoding strategy for yeast deletion strains.
Dark purple boxes represent yeast homology regions, which
recombine with the endogenous gene (crosses). Gray boxes
represent unique oligonucleotide barcodes for unambiguous
strain identification. Pale purple represents selectable marker
gene. (See main text for details.)

region at each end (Fig. 19.1). These provide a means
to detect the presence of specific strains in a population rapidly by hybridization of PCR products to
an oligonucleotide chip, known as a barcode chip
(Shoemaker et al. 1996). Thus the growth properties
of potentially all the targeted yeast strains can be
assayed in parallel (Giaever et al. 1999, 2002).
The advantage of these systematic approaches
is that strains can be maintained as a central
resource and then distributed to laboratories worldwide for functional analysis. Each mutant strain can
be subjected to many different assays in parallel to
determine the function of the missing gene product
rapidly. For example, this approach has been used to
screen for genes required for centromeric adhesion
(Marston et al. 2004). Specialized screening may
also be carried out e.g. to assay for sensitivity or
resistance to particular drugs (Bianchi et al. 1999,
Giaever et al. 2004, Baetz et al. 2004, Lum et al.
2004). In one report, the yeast deletion library was
used to establish synthetic genetic arrays in which
double-mutant phenotypes could be studied systematically (Tong et al. 2001).
It is unlikely that systematic gene targeting
will be achieved in higher eukaryotes in the
foreseeable future
Despite the benefits of gene targeting, in particular
the precision with which specific mutant alleles
can be designed, there has been no coordinated
program for systematic gene knockouts in any other
model organism. However, due to the efforts of individual researchers, several thousand independently
derived targeted mouse strains have already been
produced, and several excellent and comprehensive
databases are available on the Internet which list
these mouse strains (Box 19.1). It is therefore possible that a mouse knockout project could evolve
over the next few years with the aim of completing
the knockout catalog and providing a comprehensive
genome-wide data set.

396

CHAPTER 19

Box 19.1 Internet resources for gene targeting
Websites providing information
on systematic knockout projects
in yeast

Websites containing information and
resources for transgenic and gene
targeted mice

http://mips.gsf.de/proj/eurofan/index.html
The EUROFAN website (Dujon 1998)
http://sequence-www.stanford.edu/group/
yeast_deletion_project The Saccharomyces
Gene Deletion Project website (Winzeler
et al. 1999)

http://jaxmice.jax.org/index.shtml The
Jackson Laboratory website, describing
over 2500 strains of targeted mutant mice
http://tbase.jax.org TBASE, a comprehensive
transgenic and targeted mutant database
run by the Jackson Laboratory
http://www.bioscience.org/knockout/
knochome.htm Frontiers in Science gene
knockout database
http://biomednet.com/db/mkmd BioMedNet
Mouse Knockout Database

Since gene targeting has also been achieved
recently in Drosophila, it is possible that this organism
may be the next to benefit from a systematic genetargeting program. However, the effort required
to knock out the estimated 13,000 genes in the
Drosophila genome may be too great given the more
complex process of the gene-targeting methodology
compared to yeast (p. 272).

Genome-wide random mutagenesis is a
strategy applicable to all organisms
Saturation mutagenesis has been used for many
years to identify mutations affecting specific biological processes. Essentially, the idea behind such an
experiment is to mutagenize a population of whatever species is under study and recover enough
mutants to stand a reasonable chance that each
gene in the genome has been “hit” at least once. This
population can then be screened to identify mutants
in a particular function. For example, large-scale
screens have been carried out in the past to look for
replication mutants in bacteria, cell-cycle mutants
in yeast, and more recently, developmental mutants
in Drosophila and the zebrafish. The difference between
these traditional studies and the new science of functional genomics is that, in the former, the majority
of the mutants were discarded. Researchers focused
on a particular area and ignored mutants affecting
other processes because they were not interested
in them. In functional genomics, all mutations are
interesting, and the idea is to catalog them, generate

a sequence signature from each affected gene, and
use these signatures to annotate full-length genomic
and cDNA sequences housed in databases.
Insertional mutagenesis leaves a DNA tag in
the interrupted gene, which facilitates cloning
and gene identification
By far the most popular mutagenesis strategy in
functional genomics is insertional mutagenesis, where
a piece of DNA is randomly inserted into the genome
causing gene disruption and loss of function. The
DNA may constitute a transposable element, i.e. a
sequence that can jump from site to site in the
genome when supplied with the necessary enzyme
(transposase), or it may be a foreign DNA sequence
that is introduced into the cell. The main advantage
of this strategy over traditional forms of mutagenesis
is that the interrupted gene becomes “tagged” with
the insertion element, hence the strategy is sometimes termed signature-tagged mutagenesis (STM).
Simple hybridization- or PCR-based techniques can
be used to obtain the flanking DNA. The sequence
of this flanking DNA can then be used to interrogate sequence databases, allowing the tagged gene
to be associated with its “parent” genomic clone
or cDNA. If the insertion also generates a mutant
phenotype, the gene in the database can then be
ascribed a tentative function. Another advantage
of insertional mutagenesis is that the insertion element can be modified into an entrapment vector
to provide information about the gene it interrupts
(Box 19.2)

397

Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

Box 19.2 Gene traps and other advanced gene tagging vectors
Gene tagging is the use of an insertional
mutagen to mark interrupted genes with a
unique DNA sequence. This DNA sequence
subsequently can be used as a target for
hybridization or as an annealing site for PCR
primers, allowing flanking sequences to be
isolated. One simple way to achieve this is by
inverse PCR, in which primers annealing at
each edge of an insertion element are
designed to point outwards. In this way, if a
genomic fragment is circularized, the PCR
can be used to amplify flanking regions (see
Fig. B19.1). By careful design, however,
simple gene tagging vectors can be modified
in a number of ways to expedite cloning
and provide more information about the
interrupted genes. Some of these refinements
are considered below.
Plasmid rescue vector
The insertion element in this type of vector
contains the origin of replication and
antibiotic resistance marker from a bacterial
plasmid (Perucho et al. 1980). Genomic DNA
from a tagged organism is digested with a
restriction enzyme that does not cut in the
insert, and the resulting linear fragments are
self-ligated to form circles. The complex
mixture of circles is then used to transform
bacteria, which are grown under antibiotic
selection. The circle containing the origin of
replication and resistance gene is propagated
as a plasmid while all the other circles are lost.
In this way, the genomic sequences flanking
the insert can be isolated and selectively
amplified in a single step. Although more
time-consuming than the direct amplification
of flanking sequences by PCR, “rescued”
plasmids can be maintained as a permanent
resource library.
Gene trap vector
In this vector, the insertion element contains
a visible marker gene such as lacZ (encoding
b-galactosidase) or gusA (encoding bglucuronidase) downstream of a splice
acceptor site (Gossler et al. 1989, Friedrich &

Digest DNA with restriction
endonuclease, to cut at sites
marked

Circularize, ligate

Primer 1

Primer 2

Outwardly-facing primers
anneal at core region,
PCR amplification

Fig. B19.1 Inverse PCR. The core region is indicated by
the wavy line. Restriction sites are marked with arrows,
and the left and right regions which flank the core region
are represented by closed and open boxes. Primers are
designed to hybridize with core sequences and are
extended in the directions shown. PCR amplification
generates a linear fragment containing left and right
flanking sequences.

Soriano 1991, Skarnes et al. 1992, Wurst et al.
1995). The marker gene is therefore activated
only if the element inserts within the
transcription unit of a gene and generates a
transcriptional fusion. This strategy selects for
insertions into genes and is very useful in
animals and plants with large amounts of nongenic DNA (Evans et al. 1997, Springer 2000).
Early gene trap vectors depended on in-frame

398

CHAPTER 19

Box 19.2
insertion, so up to two-thirds of all “hits” on
genes were not recognized. Furthermore,
expression of the marker relied on the
transcriptional activity of the surrounding
gene, so inserts into non-expressed genes
were not detected. The use of internal
ribosome entry sites has obviated the need for
in-frame insertion and has greatly increased
the hit rate of gene traps. The incorporation of
a second marker, which is driven by its own
promoter but carries a downstream splice
donor making it dependent on the
surrounding gene for polyadenylation, has
facilitated the detection of non-expressed
genes (Zambrowicz et al. 1998).
Enhancer trap vector
This construct comprises a visible marker gene
downstream of a minimal promoter. Under
normal circumstances the promoter is too
weak to activate the marker gene and it is
not expressed. However, if the construct

Genome-wide insertional mutagenesis in
yeast has been carried out with endogenous
and heterologous transposons
In yeast, both endogenous transposons and heterologous (bacterial) transposons have been used for
saturation mutagenesis. The endogenous retrotransposon Ty has been used as an insertional mutagen,
and libraries of mutants have been generated carrying the Ty element as a “genetic footprint” (Smith
et al. 1995, 1996). Several copies of the Ty element
are normally present in the yeast genome, so an
element modified to carry a unique DNA signature
was used as a mutagen to enable unambiguous identification of interrupted genes. A PCR-based strategy
was developed in which a primer annealing to the
modified element was used in combination with a
number of gene-specific primers to identify insertions
at particular loci (Fig. 19.2). This strategy, which has
been widely adopted in other functional genomics
programs (see below), allows highly parallel analysis
of large populations of yeast cells, increasing the likelihood that an insertion will be detected in a given
gene. A disadvantage of Ty-based functional genomics

continued
integrates in the vicinity of an endogenous
enhancer, the marker is activated and reports
the expression profile driven by the enhancer
(O’Kane & Gehring 1987). The enhancer is
often a long way from the gene so enhancer
trapping is not a convenient method for
cloning novel genes. However, it can be
exploited in other ways, e.g. to drive the
expression of a toxin and thus ablate a specific
group of cells. This technique has been widely
used in Drosophila (O’Kane & Moffat 1992).
Activation tagging
In this technique, the insertion element carries
a strong outward-facing promoter. If the
element integrates adjacent to an endogenous
gene, that gene will be activated by the
promoter. Unlike other insertion vectors,
which cause loss of function by interrupting a
gene, an activation tag causes gain of function
through overexpression or ectopic expression
(Kakimoto 1996).

is the tendency for the element to insert at the 5′ end
of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III, i.e.
mainly tRNA genes (Ji et al. 1993). Protein-encoding
genes, which represent the vast majority of the transcriptome, are transcribed by RNA polymerase II.
Genome-wide insertional mutagenesis in yeast has
also been performed with an Escherichia coli Tn3
transposon modified to make a very sophisticated
gene trap vector (Ross-Macdonald et al. 1997, 1999).
Transposons from E. coli are not mobilized in yeast,
but mutagenesis can be carried out in the surrogate environment of a bacterial cell transformed with
a yeast genomic construct. From there, the genomic
DNA is reintroduced into yeast cells, where it recombines with the endogenous genome, replacing
the existing sequence. Ross-Macdonald and colleagues have generated a bank of E. coli strains
housing genomic DNA clones covering the entire
yeast genome. Mutant clones were then isolated from
these strains and reintroduced into diploid yeast
cells, generating a library of 12,000 mutant yeast
strains. There are several advantages to this strategy
including the fact that stable insertions are generated, allowing the production of mutant lines as a

399

Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

Gene-specific primers

Gene A

Gene B

Gene C

Gene D

Transposon integrates into Gene A

PCR

Transposon-specific primer

PCR product confirms
integration in Gene A

Fig. 19.2 Principle of target-selected random mutagenesis. Random insertional mutagenesis is carried out on a population.
Mutants for any particular gene can then be identified by PCR amplification using one gene-specific primer and one primer specific
for the insertional mutagen. For organisms with completely sequenced genomes, inserts can be identified in any gene. For
organisms with incomplete genome sequences, the target gene has to be isolated and sequenced first so that gene-specific primers
can be designed. In large populations, pools of cells/seeds/embryos, etc. can be screened and then deconvoluted to identify
individual mutant strains.

lacZ

Markers

H

Integration: mutant allele

lacZ

Markers

H
Cre expression:
Epitope tag fusion protein
Protein localization

Transcriptional fusion:
Gene trap reporter
lacZ

H

Fig. 19.3 Multifunctional Escherichia coli Tn3 cassette used for random mutagenesis in yeast. The cassette comprises Tn3
components (black), lacZ (gray), selectable markers (light purple) and an epitope tag (very light purple, H). The lacZ gene and
markers are flanked by loxP sites (triangles). Integration generates a mutant allele which may or may not reveal a mutant
phenotype. The presence of the lacZ gene at the 5′ end of the construct allows transcriptional fusions to be generated, so the
insert can be used as a reporter construct to reveal the normal expression profile of the interrupted gene. If Cre recombinase is
provided, the lacZ gene and markers are deleted, leaving the endogenous gene joined to the epitope tag, allowing protein
localization to be studied.

permanent resource, and that E. coli transposons are
not subject to the insertional bias of yeast Ty elements, and therefore provide a better random coverage of the genome. Even so, there is still a certain
degree of site selection, resulting in the preferential
recovery of mutant alleles for some genes and the
omission of others. The modified Tn3 transposon
comprised a reporter gene downstream of a splice
acceptor bracketed by subterminal loxP sites, allowing excision of most of the insert following expression of Cre recombinase. Outside the loxP sites, the
transposon also carries an in-frame epitope tag. Thus,

following Cre-mediated excision of the transposon,
the endogenous gene becomes fused to the epitope
tag, allowing the characterization and localization of
proteins (Fig. 19.3).
Genome-wide insertional mutagenesis in
vertebrates has been facilitated by the
development of artificial transposon systems
One of the key functional objectives of the mouse
genome project is the development of a comprehensive insertional mutagenesis library in ES cells (Denny

400

CHAPTER 19

& Justice 2000). Tagging by insertional mutagenesis
has a long history in mouse genetics. It has been
demonstrated serendipitously in transgenic mice in
cases where the transgene has by chance integrated
into an endogenous gene and inactivated it (e.g. see
Rijkers et al. 1994). Also, it is notable that approximately 5% of all naturally occurring recessive mutations in the mouse are caused by a particular family
of retroviruses when they integrate into or adjacent
to an endogenous gene. Indeed, the cloning of several mouse genes has been facilitated by virtue of
their linkage to a proviral sequence (e.g. Bowes et al.
1993).
Gene trapping in ES cells is being carried out by
several groups. The concept of ES gene trap libraries
was first put into practice by Hicks et al. (1997), who
analyzed 400 inserts and identified 63 genes and
anonymous cDNAs on the basis of flanking sequence
tags. The German Gene Trap Consortium (GGTC) is
aiming to produce and characterize 20,000 gene
trap ES lines using a retroviral gene trap vector. By
the year 2000, more than 12,000 lines had been
produced and flanking sequences had been determined to generate a database of gene trap sequence
tags (GSTs) (Wiles et al. 2000). A similar project
was carried out by the US biotechnology company
Lexicon Genetics. The result was a library of gene
trap ES cell lines called OmniBank, represented by
over 50,000 “OmniBank sequence tags” corresponding to both expressed and non-expressed genes.
Both these organizations have websites providing
more information on the programs and a searchable
database to identify tagged genes (Box 19.3).
Retrovirus-based vectors have been used to create
cell-based mutant libraries in vertebrates, but direct
application in whole animals has been more challenging because of the lack of active retrotransposons in vertebrate genomes (Ivics & Izsvak 2005).
For example, vertebrate genomes contain millions
of mariner-type transposons, all of which appear
to be non-functional due to the accumulation of
mutations. This problem has been addressed in one
case by creating a new transposon through the
derivation of a functional consensus sequence from
the sequences of many non-functional copies. The
strategy was based on the assumption that different mutations would occur in different copies of
the element, and that a consensus sequence should
represent an active, archetypal element. By looking
at endogenous fish mariner-type retrotransposons in
this manner, the Sleeping Beauty transposon system
was created (Ivics et al. 1997). Sleeping Beauty has

been used for large-scale mutagenesis studies in fish
(Zbikowska 2003) as well as in mammals (Ivics et al.
1997, Clarke et al. 2004). Similarly, Frog Prince is
a reconstructed amphibian retrotransposon based
on endogenous non-functional elements in the frog
Rana pipens. It has been shown to work in a wide
range of vertebrate cells (Miskey et al. 2003). In
another approach, an endogenous retrotransposon
with low activity has been “enhanced” to increase its
transposition frequency. Han & Boeke (2004) have
modified a mouse LINE1 retrotransposon to remove
an adenosine-rich tract within one of the open
reading frames without altering the coding sense,
thereby increasing the transposition frequency over
200-fold. In a third approach, Dewannieux et al.
(2004) screened through the 1000 or so IAP
(intracisternal A particle) retrotransposons in the
mouse genome to identify those with intact open
reading frames and, by implication, the highest activity. Neither of these approaches has yet matched
the impressive 10% transposition efficiency of Sleeping
Beauty (determined by the introduction of an antibiotic resistance cassette into cultured cells) although
further modification of the transposons could enhance
them further.
Insertional mutagenesis in plants can be
achieved using Agrobacterium T-DNA or
plant transposons
Insertional mutagenesis is the most appropriate
option for functional genomics in plants because
of the very low efficiency with which homologous
recombination occurs in higher plant species. A
number of different systems have been developed,
and essentially these fall into two groups: those
involving the use of T-DNA from Agrobacterium
tumefaciens (Azpiroz-Leehan et al. 1997, Krysan
et al. 1999), and those involving the use of plant
transposons (Walbot 2000, Hamer et al. 2001,
Ramachandran & Sundaresan 2001). In each case,
if a large enough population of tagged lines is available, there is a good chance of finding a plant carrying an insert within any gene of interest. Mutations
that are homozygous lethal can be maintained in the
population as heterozygous plants.
T-DNA mutagenesis requires gene transfer by
A. tumefaciens
A. tumefaciens is the soil bacterium used most extensively to generate transgenic plants (Chapter 14).

Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

401

Box 19.3 Internet resources for genome-wide random mutagenesis projects
Insertional mutagenesis in yeast
http://ygac.med.yale.edu/mtn/insertion_
libraries.stm
Insertional and ethylnitrosourea
mutagenesis in the mouse
For a more extensive list of mouse resources
see Brekers & Harabe de Angelis (2001) and
Sanford et al. (2001).
http://lena.jax.org/~jcs/Delbank.html
DELBank project information
http://www.lexgen.com/omnibank/
omnibank.htm OmniBank gene trap ES cell
library, information and resources
http://baygenomics.ucsf.edu/ BayGenomics
gene trap project
http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~skarnes/
resource.html A useful resource for mouse
gene trap insertions
http://tikus.gsf.de German Gene Trap
Consortium ES cell library, information and
resources
http://www.gsf.de/ieg/groups/
enu-mouse.html German Human Genome
Project mouse ENU mutagenesis screen
http://www.mgu.har.mrc.ac.uk/mutabase
UK/French consortium mouse ENU
mutagenesis program
Insertional mutagenesis in plants

default.htm Arabidopsis Knockout Facility
at the University of Wisconsin
http://mbclserver.rutgers.edu/~dooner/
PGRPpage.html Maize “Ac gene engine”
project to generate evenly distributed Ac
inserts in the maize genome
http://www.zmdb.iastate.edu/zmdb/
sitemap.html Maize Gene Discovery and
RescueMu project
http://mtm.cshl.org Maize Targeted
Mutagenesis database
http://nasc.nott.ac.uk/ima.html Information
and database of Ds insertion lines and
flanking sequences (Parinov et al. 1999)
with instructions for obtaining seeds
http://www.jic.bbsrc.ac.uk/sainsburylab/jonathan-jones/SINS-database/sins.htm
Information and database of sequenced
insertion sites (SINS) from dSpm lines
(Tissier et al. 1999) with instructions for
obtaining seeds
http://signal.salk.edu/cgi-bin/tdnaexpress
The Salk Institute Genome Analysis
Laboratory (SIGnAL)
http://nasc.nott.ac.uk Nottingham Arabidopsis
Stock Centre
http://arabidopsis.org/abrc Arabidopsis
Biological Resource Center
Insertional mutagenesis in Drosophila
http://www.fruitfly.org/p_disrupt/index.html
Berkeley Drosophila gene disruption project

http://www.biotech.wisc.edu/
NewServicesAndResearch/Arabidopsis/

Plant transformation involves the transfer of a small
segment of DNA, called the T-DNA, from a plasmid
harbored by the bacterium into the plant genome.
This T-DNA can act as an insertional mutagen, and
has thus far been used for genome-wide mutagenesis
programs in Arabidopsis thaliana and rice (Walden
2002). Since T-DNA is not a transposon, it has no
ability to “jump” following integration, and so has
the advantage of generating stable insertions in
primary transformants. T-DNA integration is also
believed to favor genes, but within the “gene space”
of the genome integration is essentially random.

This is not the case for most plant transposons (see
below). One disadvantage of T-DNA, however, is its
tendency to generate complex, multicopy integration patterns, sometimes involving the deletion or
rearrangement of surrounding genomic DNA. This
can complicate subsequent analysis, especially if the
PCR is used to confirm integrations within specific
genes.
A number of research groups have invested
resources in generating banks of Arabidopsis T-DNA
insertion lines (Feldmann & Marks 1987, Bouchez
et al. 1993, Campisi et al. 1999, Krysan et al. 1999,

402

CHAPTER 19

Weigel et al. 2000). This reflects the availability of
simple and convenient techniques for Agrobacteriummediated transformation of Arabidopsis, facilitating rapid saturation of the genome (Bechtold &
Pelletier 1998, Clough & Bent 1998). Furthermore,
Arabidopsis is a gene-dense plant with small introns
and little intergenic space; about 80% of the genome
is thought to represent genes.
Currently, over 130,000 T-DNA tagged Arabidopsis
lines are made available by the University of Wisconsin
Arabidopsis Knockout Facility,1 which maintains
a searchable database of mutant lines (Box 19.3).
These lines comprise two populations, one generated
by the insertion of a simple T-DNA construct (Krysan
et al. 1999), and one generated by the insertion of an
activation tag (Weigel et al. 2000). Such populations
can be used for comprehensive reverse genetics
screens (McKinney et al. 1995, Winkler et al. 1998,
Krysan et al. 1999). DNA from the tagged lines is
maintained as a series of hierarchical pools. These
can be screened in several rounds of PCR using
gene-specific primers supplied by the customer and
T-DNA-specific primers supplied by the facility.
Indeed, the system is very similar to that used in yeast
(see Fig. 19.2). If a “hit” is achieved, corresponding
seeds can be ordered and the customer can then
grow plants with a particular gene disrupted.
Modified T-DNA vectors have been used in
Arabidopsis not only as activation tags (Weigel
et al. 2000) but also as gene and promoter traps
(Feldmann 1991, Lindsey et al. 1993, Babiychuk
et al. 1997, Campisi et al. 1999). A gene trap T-DNA
vector has also been used by Jeon et al. (2000) in
a genome-wide screen of rice. These investigators
produced over 22,000 primary transformants carrying the T-DNA insertion, more than half of which

1 Some confusion in terminology can arise here. A gene knockout was originally defined as a null mutation produced by gene
targeting (homologous recombination). More recently, the
term has been used to describe any sort of induced null mutation, including those generated by (random) insertional
mutagenesis. Hence, the Arabidopsis Knockout Facility maintains a collection of null mutants generated not by gene
targeting but by random T-DNA insertion. Even worse, it is
becoming common for mutations generated by random
insertion to be called “targeted mutations” even though this
description is strikingly inaccurate. Hence, the Maize Targeted
Mutagenesis Project concerns a population of random insertional mutants generated by the transposon Mutator. The
term “target-selected mutagenesis” is more accurate, referring to the fact that researchers can identify a mutation in a
particular target gene, from a randomly mutagenized population, using a PCR-based assay on pooled DNA.

contained multiple T-DNA copies. Over 5000 tagged
lines were analyzed for reporter gene expression
in leaves and roots, 7000 lines were analyzed for
expression in flowers, and 2000 for expression in
seeds. Overall, about 2% of the lines showed marker
gene activity, in some cases ubiquitous but in many
cases restricted to highly specific cell types or tissues.
Rice lines containing T-DNA insertions have been
generated and the flanking sequences have been
characterized by Sha et al. (2004).
Transposon mutagenesis in plants can be
achieved using endogenous or heterologous
transposons
Transposons have been widely used for insertional
mutagenesis in plants and this has led to the discovery of many new genes (reviewed by Gierl &
Saedler 1992). Several transposons have been used
for genome-scale mutagenesis projects, including
Activator (Ac), Suppressor-mutator (Spm), and Mutator
(Mu) from maize, Tam3 from Antirrhinum majus, and
Tph1 from Petunia. Unlike T-DNA, transposons tend
to generate simple, single-copy insertions. However,
as is the case for Ty elements in yeast, most plant
transposons show pronounced “target-site preference”, which can make it difficult to achieve wholegenome saturation. Also, while T-DNA generates
stable inserts, additional crossing steps are required
to stabilize those generated by plant transposons.
This is because transposons have the intrinsic ability
to mobilize unless their source of transposase is
removed. Control is generally achieved by the use
of “two-component” transposon systems, comprising an autonomous (self-mobilizing) element and a
non-autonomous derivative. For example, the maize
transposon Activator (Ac) is autonomous because it
encodes its own transposase, but shorter derivatives
of Ac called Dissociation (Ds) lack the transposase gene.
However, Ds elements can transpose if transposase
is provided by Ac. Thus, where Ac and Ds are present
in the same genome, both elements can be mobile.
However, if Ac is removed by crossing, progeny
plants can be recovered with stable Ds insertions.
The properties of transposons vary, making
different transposon families suitable for different
applications. Although maize Ac/Ds has been widely
used for genome-scale mutagenesis, it actually
demonstrates a phenomenon called “local transposition”, i.e. it jumps preferentially to linked sites (as
does the Sleeping Beauty element discussed above).
This can make saturation difficult, particularly if

Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

there are a small number of founder lines, but it can
also be an advantage for generating multiple mutant
alleles in one gene, or for generating mutations in
several clustered genes in a local genomic region. If
necessary, selection systems can be devised to select
against closely linked transpositions (Parinov et al.
1999, Tissier et al. 1999). This problem can also be
circumvented by generating a population of maize
plants with Ac/Ds elements spaced at regular 10–20
cM intervals throughout the genome. Such a project
is indeed in progress at the Waksman Institute,
Rutgers University, and can be seen at the following website: http://mbclserver.rutgers.edu/~dooner/
PGRPpage.html.
Another maize transposon, Mutator (Mu), does
not show preferential local transposition, and is
therefore a potentially better global mutagen than
Ac. However, it does preferentially insert into transcription units, making it an excellent tool for gene
disruption. Several genome-wide mutagenesis projects have therefore been established in maize using
Mu, including the Trait Utility System for Corn
(TUSC) developed by Pioneer Hi-Bred International,
and the Maize Targeted Mutagenesis (MTM) project.
In each case, PCR primers facing away from the transposon are used in combination with a gene-specific
primer to identify insertions into specific genes, with
DNA pooled from maize plants in the field as the template. These resources have been used successfully
by a number of investigators (e.g. Bensen et al. 1995,
Das & Martiensen 1995, Hu et al. 1998). The Maize
Gene Discovery Project uses a modified Mu transposon called RescueMu, which can be used for plasmid
rescue from whole-genomic DNA. The rescued
plasmids have been used to generate DNA libraries
containing the Mu insertion sites. The PCR is carried
out on these plasmids to identify insertions in genes
of interest. In all the facilities, seeds corresponding
to each insertion can be supplied. A genome-wide
study using RescueMu has been published recently
(Fernandez et al. 2004). Websites with further information on maize genome projects, search facilities,
and databases of tagged genes are listed in Box 19.3.
Some transposons, such as the Drosophila Pelement (see below) can only function in their host
species. Others, including Ac and another maize
transposon called Suppressor-mutator (Spm) are more
promiscuous and these can be used in a range of
heterologous plants (Osbourne & Baker 1995). The
transposons must initially be introduced into the
foreign genome either as a T-DNA or as a conventional transgene delivered by a method such as

403

particle bombardment. Once integrated into the
genome, however, normal transposition may then
occur. Functional genomics programs using Ac have
been initiated in Arabidopsis (Ito et al. 1999, Seki et al.
1999, Kuromori et al. 2004) and tomato (Meissner
et al. 2000). Spm has been used for several largescale Arabidopsis mutagenesis projects (e.g. Tissier
et al. 1999, Speulman et al. 1999). Where Ac has
been used in Arabidopsis, the investigators have
exploited local transposition to saturate genomic
regions surrounding the original integration site. In
both studies (Ito et al. 1999, Seki et al. 1999), a cDNA
scanning strategy was used to isolate ESTs from this
region, leading to rapid gene annotation.
The genome-wide transposon mutagenesis projects in Arabidopsis have produced a large number
of mutant lines. As for the T-DNA insertion lines
discussed above, many of the transposon lines
are now maintained at a central resource, in this
case the Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre in
the UK, and the Arabidopsis Biological Resource
Center in America. This includes 960 DNA pools
from Spm insertion lines corresponding to 48,000
inserts (Tissier et al. 1999) and about 2600 DNA
pools from multiple Spm insertion lines, representing
up to 65,000 insertions (Speulman et al. 1999).
The flanking sequences have been determined and
analyzed by BLAST searches, and the results are
available on searchable databases, allowing the
rapid identification of interrupted genes (Seki et al.
1999, Parinov et al. 1999, Speulman et al. 1999,
Tissier et al. 1999). Websites for these resources are
listed in Box 19.3.

Insertional mutagenesis in invertebrates
Genome-wide insertional mutagenesis programs
have been initiated in several other animals. For
example, the Tc1 transposon has been used to generate a frozen bank of insertion mutants of the
nematode C. elegans yielding 5000 lines and 16 newly
identified genes (Zwall et al. 1993). P-elements
(Chapter 13) have been developed as insertional
mutagens (Spradling & Rubin 1982) and have been
used to clone and characterize many Drosophila
genes (reviewed by Cooley et al. 1988). Currently, a
genome-wide mutagenesis program is ongoing at
The Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project, with the
aim of generating a comprehensive library of mutant
fly strains (Spradling et al. 1995, 1999). In the initial
phase of the program, about 4000 mutagenized lines

404

CHAPTER 19

were examined for P-element insertions. Redundant
strains (i.e. allelic mutations) were eliminated, leaving 1045 unique inserts identifying over 1000 genes
with homozygous lethal phenotypes. This corresponds to approximately 25% of all “essential” genes
on the autosomal chromosomes. As discussed above,
saturation of the genome has proven difficult
because P-elements, like many transposons, show a
pronounced insertional bias (Liao et al. 2000). Also,
many interrupted genes do not reveal a mutant phenotype, perhaps because the element has inserted
into a non-essential region, such as an intron. With
the recent completion of the Drosophila genome
sequence (Adams et al. 2000), Spradling and colleagues have begun to collect sequence signatures
from the flanks of each P-element insertion and
identify genes by comparing these signatures to the
genomic sequence. This removes the dependency on
a mutant phenotype. At the same time, an additional
set of P-element vectors is being used, which function as activation tags (Rorth 1996, Rorth et al.
1998). Hopefully, many of the genes that do not
reveal informative loss of function phenotypes will
show gain of function phenotypes in this screen.
More recently, Thibault et al. (2004) have shown
that the combined use of two different transposon
systems with distinct site preferences (P-elements
and piggyback transposons), can accelerate genome
saturation – they achieved 53% saturation with
29,000 inserts. The Berkeley Drosophila Genome
Project maintains websites for both the P-element
mutagenesis program and the P-element gene
misexpression program (Box 19.3). Many of the
disrupted lines are also available from Drosophila
resources, such as the Bloomingdale Stock Center:
http://flybase.bio.indiana.edu/stocks.
Chemical mutagenesis is more efficient than
transposon mutagenesis, and generates
point mutations
While insertional mutagenesis is likely to remain
the most popular approach to functional genomics
because of the way interrupted genes are marked
with a DNA tag, the use of chemical mutagens is
more efficient, and also generates point mutations,
which can be more informative under certain circumstances. In the mouse, for example, models of
human disease phenotypes are much more likely to
arise by point mutation than by the insertion of a
large DNA cassette. Furthermore, insertional mutagenesis tends to generate null alleles (complete loss

of gene function) which in many cases is lethal,
while point mutations often have less severe effects.
The alkylating agent ethylnitrosurea (ENU) is the
most powerful mutagen available for mice (Russell
et al. 1979; reviewed by Justice et al. 1999). Largescale mutagenesis screens have been carried out
successfully in other species using this chemical (e.g.
Mullins et al. 1994 used ENU in zebrafish) but most
of the screens carried out in mice have been limited
in their scope (e.g. Bode et al. 1988, Shedlovsky et al.
1988, Rinchik et al. 1990). Two groups of researchers
have carried out genome-wide ENU mutagenesis
screens in mice. As part of the German Human
Genome Project, Balling and colleagues have screened
14,000 ENU-mutagenized mouse lines for dominant
and recessive mutations affecting a large number of
clinically important phenotypes (Hrabe de Angelis &
Balling 1998, Hrabe de Angelis et al. 2000). Categories
included allergy, immunology, clinical chemistry,
nociception (response to pain), and dysmorphology (abnormal structure). In the initial study, 182
mutants were cataloged and many more are still
undergoing analysis. Simultaneously, a consortium
of UK and French researchers reported a similar largescale experiment (Nolan et al. 2000). In this case,
26,000 mice were screened for dominant mutations
and 500 were recovered. The mice were tested for
visible developmental defects from birth to weaning, and then subjected to a battery of functional,
behavioral, and biochemical tests over the next eight
weeks. In both programs, mutations were mapped
by interspecific backcrossing using a genome-wide
panel of microsatellite polymorphisms (Balling 2001).

Libraries of knock-down phenocopies
can be created by RNA interference
A phenocopy has the same appearance as a mutant
phenotype, but there are no changes to the DNA
sequence. While phenotypes are caused by mutations, phenocopies are generated by interfering with
gene expression. For example, antisense RNA can be
used to inactivate the messenger RNA corresponding to a particular gene, or antibodies can be used
to inactivate the protein. In each case, there is a
loss of gene function while the gene itself remains
intact (Chapter 15). Over the last five years, RNA
interference has become the method of choice for
large-scale functional studies because of its simplicity and the potency of its effects. The basis of RNA
interference is discussed in Chapter 15, while in this

Large-scale mutagenesis and interference

chapter we consider how the technique has been
applied in large-scale studies.
RNA interference has been used to generate
comprehensive knock-down libraries in
Caenorhabditis elegans
The genome sequence of the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans was published by the C. elegans
Genome Sequencing Consortium in 1998. Of the
higher (multicellular) eukaryotes, C. elegans has the
smallest genome and the most convenient biological
properties for high-throughput handling – it is small,
hermaphrodite, and can be viably stored as frozen
stocks. Therefore the worm is a very attractive target
for functional genomic studies. Coincidentally, C.
elegans is the model organism in which the phenomenon of RNA interference was first documented
(Fire et al. 1998). Over the last few years, several
large-scale RNAi screens have been carried out in
C. elegans. In many cases, the phenocopies of the
RNAi functional knockouts are equivalent to genuine knockout phenotypes produced by traditional
mutagenesis strategies.
Microinjection is currently the most consistently
effective way to induce RNAi. Typically, in vitro
synthesized dsRNA is injected into the germline of
adult worms, and progeny are screened for RNAiinduced phenocopies. Due to the laborious nature of
the microinjection procedure, carrying out individual injections corresponding to each of the 15,000
genes in the C. elegans genome is a challenging task,
but Gonczy et al. (2000) described just such an
approach for the functional analysis of chromosome
III. This group synthesized over 2200 individual
dsRNA molecules (corresponding to over 95% of
the genes on the chromosome) and then carried out
systematic microinjections followed by screening for
RNAi-induced phenocopies that affected the first
two cleavage divisions of development. Remarkably,
they obtained a hit rate of over 6% (133 genes were
found to be involved in cleavage). This group of
genes included all seven chromosome III genes
that had previously been shown through traditional
mutagenesis to affect cell division, providing important validation of the procedure.
Sugimoto and colleagues (Maeda et al. 2001) used
the alternative and simpler approach of adding
dsRNA to the worms’ medium to test the function of
approximately 2500 genes represented in the C. elegans EST database. They found that nearly one-third
of the genes revealed an RNAi phenocopy that could

405

be easily scored under the dissecting microscope.
Ahringer and colleagues adopted another approach,
that of feeding worms on bacteria expressing dsRNA
(Fraser et al. 2000). In a pilot study, they generated
a library of bacterial strains expressing over 2400
different dsRNAs, representing just under 90% of
the genes on chromosome I. Worms were then fed
on these bacterial strains, and RNAi-induced phenocopies were sought in the progeny. Of the genes
tested 14% revealed observable phenocopies, and in
90% of the genes that had previously been characterized by mutagenesis, the mutant phenotypes and
RNAi phenocopies were concordant. More recently,
this project has been expanded to cover the entire
C. elegans genome, and a library has been made publicly available covering 86% of the genes (Kamarth
& Ahringer 2003, Kamarth et al. 2003). This feeding
library has been used for the systematic functional
analysis of different classes of genes, such as G-proteincoupled receptors (Keating et al. 2003) and genes
involved in apoptotic DNA degradation (Parrish et al.
2003). Interestingly, it has proven more difficult to
generate phenocopies of neuronal gene mutations in
C. elegans by RNAi, one specific example of the general problem of variable penetrance associated with
this technique. Recently, however, a mutation that
sensitizes worms to the effect of RNAi has been
identified which may alleviate this problem (Simmer
et al. 2003). Another problem with RNAi is variable
specificity, or “off-target effects”. This is likely to
reflect the design of siRNA constructs, and may be
resolved as researchers gain more experience. At
the current time, the problem of off-target effects is
generally tackled by designing more than one RNAi
construct for each target gene (Jackson et al. 2003).
The first genome-wide RNAi screens in other
organisms have been carried out
RNAi is not restricted to the worm, and it has
been used for mid-scale screens in a number of other
organisms, including the fruit fly, plants, the mouse,
and human cells. An example of such a screen
carried out in Drosophila was reported by Lum et al.
(2003). These investigators discovered several new
components of the Hedgehog signaling pathway
using RNAi constructs representing about 40%
of the genome. The first genome-wide screen in
Drosophila was reported recently (Boutros et al.
2004). This involved constructs representing 91%
of the genome and sought to identify genes required
for cell growth and viability. Duplicate screens were

406

CHAPTER 19

performed to eliminate false positives and nearly
450 dsRNAs generated a recognizable phenotype
in both screens, most of which represented genes
that had not been identified in previous mutagenesis
experiments. Small-scale screens in mammalian
cells using synthetic siRNAs or short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) transgenes have been reported (e.g. AzaBlanc et al. 2003). More recently, several large-scale
RNAi screens have been carried out in mammalian
cells. In one such study, which sought to identify
novel regulators of the transcription factor NF-κB,
16,000 shRNA constructs were synthesized, two
for each of the target genes to improve the hit rate
(Zheng et al. 2004). In a second study, 15,000
shRNA retrovirus vectors were used to identify regulators of proteasome function (Paddison et al. 2004).
In a third study, Berns et al. (2004) synthesized 8000
retroviral shRNA vectors to study regulators of p53.
In each of the latter studies, a barcode strategy was
used to allow pooling of the vectors and increase the
throughput of the technique.

Suggested reading
Anderson K.V. (2000) Finding the genes that direct
mammalian development: ENU mutagenesis in the
mouse. Trends in Genetics 16, 99–102. A commentary
on the use of ENU for large-scale mutagenesis studies in
the mouse, focusing on development.
Barstead R. (2001) Genome-wide RNAi. Current
Opinion in Chemical Biology 5, 63–6.
Kim S.K. (2001) C. elegans: mining the functional genomic landscape. Nature Reviews Genetics 2, 681–9.
Sugimoto, A. (2004) High-throughput RNAi in Caenorhabditis elegans: genome-wide screens and functional
genomics. Differentiation 72, 81–91.
Current accounts of functional genomics in C. elegans
using RNA interference and other methods.
Beckers J. & Hrabe de Angelis M. (2001) Large-scale
mutational analysis for the annotation of the mouse

genome. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 6,
17–23. An excellent summary of mutational analysis in
the mouse, covering transgenics, gene traps, knockouts,
and ENU mutagenesis.
Cecconi F. & Meyer B.I. (2000) Gene trap: a way to
identify novel genes and unravel their biological
function. FEBS Letters 480, 63–71.
Stanford W.L., Cohn J.B. & Cordes S.P. (2001) Genetrap mutagenesis: past, present and beyond. Nature
Reviews Genetics 2, 756–68.
Two good summaries of insertional mutagenesis projects in
the mouse, using gene-trap vectors.
Coelho P.S.R., Kumar A. & Snyder M. (2000)
Genome-wide mutant collections: toolboxes for functional genomics. Current Opinion in Microbiology 3,
309–15. An excellent and very accessible review
concentrating on gene knockout and random mutagenesis
projects in yeast and other microbes, with comparison to
similar projects in higher eukaryotes.
Hamer L., DeZwaan T.M., Montenegro-Chamorro M.V.,
Frank S.A. & Hamer J.E. (2001) Recent advances in
large-scale transposon mutagenesis. Current Opinion
in Chemical Biology 5, 67–73. A summary of recent
transposon mutagenesis projects, concentrating on yeast
and plants.
Maes T., De Keukeleire P. & Gerats T. (1999) Plant
tagnology. Trends in Plant Sciences 4, 90–6.
Parinov S. & Sundaresan V. (2000) Functional genomics
in Arabidopsis: large-scale insertional mutagenesis
complements the genome sequencing project. Current
Opinion in Biotechnology 11, 157–61.
These reviews provide broad coverage of transposon and
T-DNA mutagenesis studies in plants.
Friedman A. & Perrimon N. (2004) Genome-wide
high-throughput screens in functional genomics.
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 14,
460–76.
Nagy A., Perrimon N., Sandmeyer S. & Plasterk R.
(2003) Tailoring the genome: the power of genetic
approaches. Nature Genetics 33: 276–84.
Rijkers T., Peetz A. & Ruther U. (1994) Insertional
mutagenesis in transgenic mice. Transgenic Research
3, 203–15.

CHAPTER 20
Analysis of the transcriptome

Introduction
Important insights into gene function can be gained
by expression profiling, i.e. determining where and
when particular genes are expressed. For example,
some genes are switched on (induced) or switched
off (repressed) by external chemical signals reaching
the cell surface. In multicellular organisms, many
genes are expressed in particular cell types or at certain developmental stages. Furthermore, mutating
one gene can alter the expression of others. All this
information helps to link genes into functional networks, and genes can be used as markers to define
particular cellular states.1
In the past, genes and their expression profiles
have been studied on an individual basis. Therefore,
defining functional networks in the cell has been
rather like completing a large and complex jigsaw
puzzle. More recently, technological advances have
made it possible to study the expression profiles of
thousands of genes simultaneously, culminating
in global expression profiling, where every single gene
in the genome is monitored in one experiment.
This can be carried out at the RNA level (by direct
sequence sampling or through the use of DNA
arrays, as discussed in this chapter) or at the protein level (as discussed in the next chapter). Global
expression profiling produces a holistic view of the
cell’s activity. Complex aspects of biological change,
including differentiation, response to stress, and the

1
In this context, a marker is a gene whose expression defines
a particular cellular phenotype. For example, a neuronal
marker is a gene expressed only in neurons and a cancer
marker is a gene expressed only in tumors. The term marker is
also used in a variety of alternative ways, e.g. to describe landmarks on physical and genetic maps, and to describe genes
that confer selectable or scorable phenotypes on transformed
cells and transgenic animals and plants. Standard sized proteins or nucleic acids used as references in electrophoresis
experiments are also known as markers.

onset of disease, can thus be studied at the genomic
level. Instead of defining cell states using single
markers, it is now possible to use clustering algorithms to group data obtained over many different
experiments and identify groups of co-regulated
genes. This provides a new way to define cellular
phenotypes, which can help to reveal novel drug
targets and develop more effective pharmaceuticals.
Furthermore, anonymous genes can be functionally
annotated on the basis of their expression profiles,
since two or more genes that are co-expressed over
a range of experimental conditions are likely to be
involved in the same general function.
Traditional approaches to expression
profiling allow genes to be studied singly
or in small groups
Since the 1970s, techniques have been available
to monitor gene expression on an individual basis,
and many of these are discussed in Chapter 2. The
principles behind each technique are summarized
in Box 20.1. Analysis at the RNA level invariably
relies on the specificity of nucleic acid hybridization. The target RNA is either directly recognized by
a labeled complementary nucleic acid probe, or is
first converted into cDNA and then hybridized to a
specific pair of primers which facilitate amplification
by the PCR.
Unfortunately, none of these traditional techniques is particularly suited to global expression
profiling. This is because the experimental design is
optimized for single gene analysis, i.e. each experiment works on the principle that a single nucleic
acid probe (or primer combination) is used to identify
a single target. Although it is possible to modify
at least some of the techniques for the parallel analysis of multiple genes (multiplexing), the procedure
becomes increasingly technically demanding and
laborious as more genes are assayed simultaneously.

408

CHAPTER 20

Box 20.1 Gene-by-gene techniques for expression analysis
The techniques described below are some of
the most widely applied in molecular biology.
For a more detailed discussion of these
procedures and an extensive list of original
references, the interested reader should
consult Sambrook & Russell (2000).
Northern blot and RNA dot blot
In these similar, hybridization-based
techniques, RNA from a complex source is
transferred to a membrane and immobilized,
either without prior fractionation (dot blot)
or after fractionation by electrophoresis
(northern blot). A labeled probe (DNA,
antisense RNA, or an oligonucleotide) is then
hybridized to the immobilized RNA. The dot
blot can indicate the presence or absence of
a particular transcript, and allows rough
quantification of the amount of RNA if several
samples are compared. In addition, the
northern blot allows size determination and
can reveal the presence of homologous
transcripts of different sizes, such as alternative
splice variants. In both cases, the probe is
applied to the membrane in great excess to
the target, and hybridization is carried out to
saturation so that the signal intensity reflects
the abundance of the immobilized target.
Disadvantages of these techniques include
their low sensitivity and the large amount of
input RNA required. It is difficult to detect rare
transcripts using this method.
Reverse northern blot
In this technique, individual target cDNAs
or genomic DNA fragments are immobilized
on a membrane and hybridized with a
complex probe, i.e. a probe prepared from a
heterogeneous RNA source. When carried out

For global analysis, it has been necessary to develop
novel technologies with a high degree of automation, which allow thousands or tens of thousands of
genes to be assayed simultaneously with minimal
labor. We discuss the development and application

to saturation, this technique is often used
simply to identify or confirm the presence of
genes in large genomic clones (see Chapter 6).
However, if non-saturating hybridization is
carried out (i.e. with the immobilized target in
great excess) the signal intensity reflects the
abundance of hybridizing molecules in the
probe. DNA array hybridization is based on
this principle (see main text).
Nuclease protection
A labeled antisense RNA probe is hybridized
in solution with a complex RNA population.
The probe is present in excess, and the
mixture is then treated with a selective
nuclease such as RNaseA, which digests
single-stranded RNA but not double-stranded
RNA. Hybridization between the probe
and target RNA protects the probe from
degradation, and simultaneously allows the
signal to be visualized on a sequencing gel.
This technique is sensitive and, since probetarget binding is stoichiometric, allows
quantification of the target molecule.
RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction)
In this technique a population of mRNA
molecules is reverse transcribed to generate
an equivalent population of cDNAs. These
are then amplified by PCR using primers
specific for a particular gene or genes. With
appropriate controls, RT-PCR can be semior fully quantitative, and the amplification is
such that very rare target molecules can be
detected and quantified. Many experiments
can be carried out in parallel, meaning that
RT-PCR is easily adaptable for multiplex
analysis.

of such technologies in the following sections, but
it should be borne in mind that the principles of
molecular recognition, which underlie the simpler
methods such as northern blots, remain largely
unchanged.

Analysis of the transcriptome

The transcriptome is the collection of all
messenger RNAs in the cell
The full complement of mRNA molecules produced
by the genome has been termed the transcriptome,
and methods for studying the transcriptome are
grouped under the term transcriptomics (Velculescu
et al. 1997). Taking human beings as an example, it
has been shown that only 3% of the genome is represented by genes, suggesting that the transcriptome is
much simpler than the genome. This is not the case,
however, because the transcriptome is much more
than just the transcribed portion of the genome.
The complexity of the transcriptome is increased
by processes such as alternative splicing and RNA
editing, so that each gene can potentially give rise to
many transcripts, each of which may have a unique
expression profile. In extreme cases, where a gene
has many introns and undergoes extensive differential processing, one gene may potentially produce
thousands or even millions of distinct transcripts. An
example is the Drosophila gene Dscam (the homolog of
the human Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule),
which can be alternatively spliced to generate nearly
40,000 different mature transcripts (twice the number of genes in the Drosophila genome). Each of these
transcripts potentially encodes a distinct receptor that
may play a unique role in axon guidance (Schmucker
et al. 2000). Other examples of this phenomenon are
discussed by Graveley (2001).
Complex as the transcriptome is, it is never seen
as a complete system in vivo. This is because all
genes are not expressed simultaneously, in the same
tissues, at the same levels. Cells transcribe a basic set
of housekeeping genes whose activity is required at
all times for elementary functions, but other luxury
genes are expressed in a regulated manner, e.g. as

part of the developmental program or in response to
an external stimulus. Similarly, post-transcriptional
events such as splicing are also regulated processes.
Researchers use phrases such as “human brain
transcriptome” or “yeast meiotic transcriptome” to
emphasize this. A typical human cell is thought to
express, on average, about 15,000–20,000 different mRNAs, some of which have housekeeping
functions and some of which are more specialized. A
proportion of these will be splice variants of the same
primary transcript. Some of the mRNAs will be very
abundant, some moderately so, and others very rare.
For a truly global perspective of RNA expression in
the cell, all of these transcripts must be quantified at
the same time. This requires a highly parallel assay
format which is both sensitive and selective.
There are two major types of strategy currently
used for global RNA expression analysis, which we
will discuss in turn:
•

•

The direct sampling of sequences from source RNA
populations or cDNA libraries, or from sequence
databases derived therefrom (Lorkowski & Cullen
2004). See Box 20.2 for Internet resources.
Hybridization analysis with comprehensive,
non-redundant collections of DNA sequences
immobilized on a solid support. These are known
as DNA arrays.

Although such analysis is often called transcriptional
profiling it is important to emphasize that one is not
really looking at the level of transcription, but at the
steady-state mRNA level, which also takes into account
the rate of RNA turnover. Furthermore, most of the
transcriptional profiling techniques discussed below
do not measure absolute RNA levels, but rather compare relative levels within and/or between samples.

Box 20.2 Sequence sampling resources on the Internet
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/UniGene/
ddd.cgi?ORG=Hs Digital Differential Display
http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/CGAP/Tissues/
XProfiler
SAGE websites
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SAGE
http://www.genzymemolecularoncology.com/
sage/

409

http://www.sagenet.org
http://www-dsv.cea.fr/thema/get/sade.html
http://www.prevent.m-utokyo.ac.jp/SAGE.html
http://www.urmc.rochester.edu/smd/crc/
swindex.html
http://sciencepark.mdanderson.org/ggeg
http://genome-www.stanford.edu/
cgi-bin/SGD/SAGE/querySAGE

410

CHAPTER 20

Steady-state mRNA levels can be quantified
directly by sequence sampling
The first large-scale gene expression studies
involved the sampling of ESTs from cDNA
libraries
Historically, the first global gene-expression studies
were based on the large-scale sequencing of random
clones from cDNA libraries (Okubo et al. 1992). A
cDNA library that has not been “normalized” is representative of the mRNAs in the source population
used to prepare it. Some mRNAs (and corresponding
cDNAs) are likely to be highly abundant, and some
extremely rare. If 5000 clones are picked randomly
from the library and partial sequences obtained,
abundant transcripts would be more frequently represented among the sequences than rare transcripts.
Statistical analysis of these results would allow relative expression levels to be determined, and comparisons of libraries prepared from different sources (e.g.
disease vs. normal, induced vs. uninduced) should
allow the identification of differentially expressed
genes. The limitation of this approach is the expense
involved in producing cDNA libraries and carrying
out the large-scale sequencing projects required
to make the data statistically significant (Audic &
Claverie 1997). However, as the amount of EST
data continues to increase for model organisms, it is
now a viable approach to interrogate this data to see
how often particular genes are represented, giving
a digital representation of gene expression. This
approach is not particularly sensitive and depends
on the availability of EST data from appropriate
sources, but it demonstrates the principle that direct
sampling of sequences in silico can be used to derive
expression data. Indeed, there have been several
reports of differentially expressed genes identified
using EST sequence sampling (e.g. see Claudio et al.
1998, Vasmatzis et al. 1998).
Serial analysis of gene expression uses
concatemerized sequence tags to identify
each gene
The major problem with EST sampling is the large
amount of sequencing required. This had been
addressed by Veculescu et al. (1995) in a technique
called serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE).
Essentially, this involves the generation of very short
ESTs (9–14 nt), known as SAGE tags, which are
joined into long concatemers that are cloned and

sequenced. The size of the SAGE tag approaches
the lower limit for the unambiguous identification
of specific genes (Adams 1996). If we consider a
random sequence of 9 nt, there are 49 possible combinations of the four bases, or 262,144 sequences.
This is approximately eight-fold the number of genes
in the mammalian genome. However, an 8-nt SAGE
tag would provide only about 65,000 variations,
which is only about twice the number of mammalian
genes. The concatemerized tags are sequenced and
the sequence is analyzed to resolve the individual
tags; the representation of each tag provides a guide
to the relative abundances of the different mRNAs.
Compared to the random sequencing of cDNA
libraries, SAGE is up to 50 times more efficient, because
each concatemer represents the presence of many
cDNAs. The major advantage of SAGE, however,
is that the data obtained are digital representations
of absolute expression levels, which allows direct
comparison between new experiments and existing
databases. Thus as the amount of SAGE data grows it
becomes increasingly possible to carry out computer
searches to identify differentially expressed genes
(e.g. see Veculescu et al. 1999).
The SAGE method as originally described is shown
in Fig. 20.1. PolyA+ RNA is reverse transcribed
using a biotinylated oligo-dT primer and the cDNA is
digested with a restriction enzyme that cleaves very
frequently, such as NlaIII (this recognizes the 4-bp
sequence CATG and would be expected to cut, on
average, every 250 bp). The 3′ end of each cDNA is
then captured by affinity to streptavidin, resulting in
a representative pool of cDNA ends that can be used
to generate the SAGE tags. Note that, by selecting
3′ ends, there is generally more sequence diversity.
Although many genes are members of multigene
families with conserved sequences, these tend to
diverge in the 3′ untranslated region even when the
coding sequences are very similar. The pool is then
split into two groups, each of which is ligated to a
different linker. The linkers contain recognition sites
for a type IIs restriction enzyme such as FokI, which
has the unusual property of cutting outside the
recognition site, but a specific number of base pairs
downstream. Cleavage with such an enzyme therefore generates the SAGE tag attached to part of the
linker. The tags are ligated “tail to tail” to generate
dimers called “ditags”, and then amplified by the
PCR using the linkers as primer annealing sites.
The amplified products are then cleaved with NlaIII
to remove the linkers, and the ditags are concatemerized. Concatemers are then cloned by standard

Analysis of the transcriptome

PolyA + RNA
TTTT– B

ATAA
TTTT– B
AAAA
TTTT– B

AAAA
TTTT– B

Anchoring enzyme,
streptavidin beads
AAAA
TTTT– B
AAAA
TTTT– B

Linker

Linker

AAAA
TTTT– B

AAAA
TTTT– B
AAAA
TTTT– B

AAAA
TTTT– B

Tagging enzyme

Ligate, PCR amplify

Anchoring enzyme, purify
ditags, concatenate

411

to characterize the transcriptome when yeast are
grown on alternative carbon sources (Kal et al. 1999)
and investigate common characteristics of highly
expressed genes (Jansen et al. 2000). In the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum, SAGE has been used
to study the transcriptome at different stages of the
life cycle (Munasingh et al. 2001, Patankar et al.
2001). In plant biology, SAGE has been used to study
rice development and Arabidopsis stress responses
(Matsumura et al. 1999, Lee et al. 2003). A recent
study has used SAGE to characterize genes associated with developmental arrest and longevity in
C. elegans: over 150 genes were identified in this
investigation, including genes encoding histones
and a novel telomere-associated protein (Jones et al.
2001). However, SAGE has been most widely used
in the context of human diseases, e.g. to analyze
changes in mRNA levels associated with cancer
(Polyak et al. 1997, Zhang et al. 1997) and other
diseases (e.g. de Waard et al. 1999, Ryo et al. 1999).
The use of SAGE in human studies has been recently
reviewed (Tuteja & Tuteja 2004a,b).
Massively parallel signature sequencing
involves the parallel analysis of millions of
DNA-tagged microbeads

Clone sequence

Fig. 20.1 Principle of serial analysis of gene expression
(SAGE). (Adapted from Veculescu et al. 1997.)
Anchoring
enzyme (Nla III);
Tagging enzyme (Fok I); B Biotin.

methods, and the resulting plasmids are sequenced
to reveal the composition of the concatemer. Accurate sequencing is essential in SAGE because even
single nucleotide errors (miscalls) could result in the
incorrect identification of a tag and false expression data for a particular gene. A similar error rate
in standard cDNA sequencing would be irrelevant,
because of the length of the sequence. More recently,
the SAGE method has been adapted so it can be used
with small amounts of starting material (Datson
et al. 1999, Peters et al. 1999, Neilson et al. 2000,
Bosch et al. 2000, Ye et al. 2000).
The SAGE method of expression profiling, with
various modifications to increase the likelihood of
identifying genes unambiguously, has been applied
to many different systems. In microbial biology,
SAGE has been used to study the yeast transcriptome
and divide the genome into functional expression
domains (Veculescu et al. 1997). It has been used

In a novel approach to global expression analysis,
Brenner and colleagues (Brenner et al. 2000) have
described massively parallel signature sequencing
(MPSS). This is a hybrid of microarray technology
and sequence sampling, in which millions of DNAtagged microbeads are aligned in a flow cell and
analyzed by fluorescence-based sequencing. The
principle of the technique is that cDNA clones can
be sequenced by sequential rounds of cleavage with
a type IIs restriction enzyme, followed by adapter
annealing, with each adapter able to “decode” the
sequence of bases left in the overhang of the restriction cleavage site. Decoding is achieved through
the use of conjugated labels, which can be analyzed
by flow cytometry. The highly parallel nature of the
technique results from the ability to simultaneously
analyze the fluorescent signal of thousands of microbeads in a flow cell, and provides the same degree of
throughput as large-scale cDNA sequencing.
The method is complex and is shown in Fig. 20.2.
Initially, a comprehensive population of 32-mer
oligonucleotides is synthesized, which are used as
tags. At the same time, an equivalent population
of complementary “anti-tags” is synthesized, and
covalently attached to plastic microbeads. The

412

CHAPTER 20

Poly(A) + RNA

F
Cleave with Dpn II and fill in
+
F
Ligate initiating adaptor

F
Cleave with Bbv 1
Hybridize encoded adaptor
+
Ligate

Hybridize decoders
Image microbeads
(16 cycles)
PE
Wash

Cleave with Bbv 1

Repeat

Fig. 20.2 Principle of massively parallel signature
sequencing (MPSS) technique. PE = fluorescent label.
(Adapted from Brenner 2000.)

32-mer tags are then mixed as a 100-fold excess
with a population of cDNAs, and ligated to form
conjugates. In the original method, about 107 different 32-mers were mixed with a population of about
5 × 104 cDNAs to generate approximately 5 × 1011
different conjugates. One percent of this mixture
was taken, ensuring that each cDNA was likely to be
represented and attached to a different tag, i.e. only
1% of the available tags were used. In the next stage
of the procedure, amplified tagged cDNAs were end
labeled with a fluorescent probe and attached to
microbeads bearing complementary anti-tags. Since
only 1% of the tags were used, only 1% of the antitags were recognized and 99% of the beads were
discarded; this was achieved by FACS. Next, the
cDNA was cleaved by the restriction enzyme DpnII to
remove the fluorescent label and generate a cohesive
site to which an initiating primer could anneal.
The initiating primer recognizes the DpnII overhang,
and carries the recognition site for a type IIs enzyme,

Bbv1, which cleaves a specific number of bases downstream of the recognition site, therefore chewing a
small fragment from the cDNA. The resulting fourbase overhang is dependent on the cDNA sequence
not the restriction enzyme. In the next stage, the
cleaved cDNA is annealed to a set of 16 encoded
adaptors. Each adaptor recognizes a specific 4-nt
overhang and carries a unique sequence at the other
end which is recognized by a fluorescent-labeled
decoding oligonucleotide. Scanning of the bead after
each round of hybridization therefore reveals the
4-bp overhang. Importantly, the encoding adaptor
also carries a Bbv1 site, allowing repetition of the
process. Therefore, a series of 4-bp calls can be followed on the same microbead in a flow cell, generating a sequence signature for each cDNA.
The accuracy of the method was determined by
carrying out MPSS analysis on early and late log
phase yeast cells and comparing the signatures
obtained with the sequences in public databases:
over 90% were represented. Expression analysis was
carried out on human THP-1 cells. Over 1.5 million
MPSS signatures were obtained from induced THP-1
cells, while nearly 1850 cDNA clones were conventionally sequenced. For most of the genes analyzed,
the expression levels revealed by cDNA sequence
sampling and MPSS analysis were very similar,
although there were discrepancies for a small number of genes which remain unexplained. Developments of this technique which allow the detection of
unlabeled cDNA sequences (Steemers et al. 2000)
and which increase sensitivity by using gold nanoparticles rather than fluorescent tags (Taton et al.
2000) have been reported. Although more expensive
than SAGE, the MPSS technique has been applied
in several studies, including whole-transcriptome
analysis in Arabidopsis (Meyers et al. 2004) and a comparison of human cell lines (Jongeneel et al. 2003).

DNA microarray technology allows the
parallel analysis of thousands of genes
on a convenient miniature device
Microarray hybridization has emerged as the
method of choice for high-throughput RNA expression analysis (Shoemaker & Linsley 2002, Whitchurch
2002, Venktasubbarao 2004). DNA microarrays
comprise a series of DNA elements arranged as spots
(features) in a grid pattern on a miniature solid support. These arrayed targets are hybridized (interrogated)
with a complex probe, i.e. a probe comprising many

Analysis of the transcriptome

different sequences, which is prepared from an RNA
population from a particular cell type or tissue.2 The
composition of the probe reflects the abundances
of individual transcripts in the source RNA population. If an excess of target DNA is provided and
hybridization occurs when the kinetics are linear,
the intensity of the hybridization signal for each
feature represents the relative level of the corresponding transcript in the probe. These conditions
are generally met because, depending on the type of
array, each individual feature comprises 106–109
molecules, only a small proportion of which will be
“occupied” during any hybridization reaction even
in the case of abundant RNAs. The use of arrays
allows simultaneous measurement of the relative
levels of many transcripts. However, one intrinsic
limitation is that microarrays are “closed systems” in
that only the sequences represented on the arrays
can be measured. In contrast, sequence sampling
techniques are “open systems” because any sequence
in the transcriptome can be sampled.
Before discussing how DNA microarrays are used
for expression profiling, it is necessary to provide
some background on the development of array technology and methodology. There are two major types
of DNA array used in expression analysis: spotted
DNA arrays and printed oligonucleotide chips. Their
principal features are compared in Table 20.1.

413

A spotted DNA array is made by transferring (spotting) actual DNA clones (or more usually PCR products derived therefrom) individually onto a solid
support where they are immobilized. The technology arose directly from conventional hybridization
analysis, and the first high-density cDNA arrays,
now described as macroarrays, were essentially the
same as the gridded reference libraries discussed on

p. 114. Cloned cDNAs stored in a matrix format in
microtiter plates were transferred to nitrocellulose
or nylon membranes in a precise grid pattern, allowing rapid identification of the clones corresponding to positive hybridization signals. For expression
analysis, complete libraries could be hybridized with
complex probes, generating a “fingerprint” specific
to a particular RNA source (Gress et al. 1992, Zhao
et al. 1995). Early examples of the use of macroarrays
for expression analysis include studies of differential
gene expression in the mouse thymus and human
muscle (Nguyen et al. 1995, Pietu et al. 1996).
Nylon macroarrays are generally about 10–
20 cm2 in size, and the feature density is low, with
typically 1–2 mm between targets (i.e. 10–100 targets per square cm). This has some advantages:
the arrays are easy to manufacture (and are therefore relatively inexpensive), and they are also simple
to use because standard hybridization procedures
are applicable. For this reason, macroarrays are still
manufactured by a number of commercial suppliers3
and the technology for in-house array production is
readily available, involving simple robotic devices or
even hand-held arrayers. The principal disadvantages of macroarrays are: (i) the low feature density
limits the number of sequences that can be interrogated simultaneously; and (ii) hybridization must
be carried out in a large volume using a radioactive
probe, the results being obtained by autoradiography
or preferably using a phosphorimager. Although
radioactive probes are sensitive, comparative gene
expression analysis (e.g. mutant vs. wild type or
stimulated vs. non-stimulated tissue) requires the
preparation of duplicate arrays, or the sequential
probing, stripping, and reprobing of the same array
with two different probes. Both these strategies
can generate inter-experimental variation that can
give misleading results. Also, the large volume of
solution required to cover the membrane limits the
probe concentration, reducing the efficiency of the

2

3

Spotted DNA arrays are produced by printing
DNA samples on treated microscope slides

In order to maintain continuity in this book, we define a
“probe” as a labeled population of nucleic acid molecules in
solution, and a “target” as an unlabeled population of nucleic
acid molecules usually immobilized on a solid support. These
definitions are generally followed by researchers using spotted arrays. However, care should be exercised when reading
literature concerning the use of Affymetrix GeneChips, since
exactly the opposite convention is followed. Each feature on
an Affymetrix GeneChip is termed a probe cell or simply a probe,
and the labeled nucleic acids in solution, which hybridize to
the features, are described as targets. We deliberately ignore
this nomenclature for the sake of clarity.

Although nylon macroarrays are sold by many biotechnology companies, they tend to be called microarrays in the
accompanying literature. The distinction between a macroarray and a microarray is not clear-cut. The term microarray
was initially coined to describe the high-density arrays printed
on small glass chips, which contrasted sharply with the
original macroarrays printed on large nylon membranes.
Confusion arises now that nylon arrays can be manufactured
with a size and feature density similar to that of the glass
arrays. A convenient cut-off point for a microarray might be
an overall size of 1–2 cm2 and a spacing between spots of
0.5 mm, but this is purely arbitrary.

414

CHAPTER 20

Table 20.1 Properties of different types of DNA array for expression analysis.

Spotted nylon
macroarrays

Property

Spotted glass
microarrays

Affymetrix
GeneChips

Target composition

dsDNA fragments (genomic or cDNA clones, or PCR
products derived from them)

Single-stranded
oligonucleotides

Target source

Maintained clone sets, either annotated or anonymous.
Must be derived from source RNA or purchased from
licensed vendors

Sequences derived from
public and/or private
databases. Chemically
synthesized

Target size

Typically 100–300 bp

Typically 20–25 nt

Array format

Individual features represent non-redundant clones;
hybridization sensitivity high

Single clones
represented by sets of
~20 non-overlapping
oligos to reduce false
positives

Density
(features per cm2)

1–10*

>5000

64,000 for available
chips, but experimental
versions up to 1,000,000

Manufacture

Robotized or manual
spotting

Robotized spotting

On-chip
photolithographic
synthesis

Substrate

Nylon

Glass

Glass or silicon

Probe labeling

Radioactive or enzymatic

Dual fluorescent

Fluorescent

Hybridization

High volume (up to 50 ml*),
~65°C

Very low volume (10 µl),
~65°C

Low volume (200 µl),
40°C

Data acquisition

Autoradiography or
phosphorimager for isotopic
probes, flatbed scanner for
enzymatic probes

Confocal scanning

Confocal scanning

Cost of prefabricated
arrays

Low

Moderate

High

In-house manufacture

Inexpensive

Expensive, but prices falling Not currently available

* Note that nylon microarrays are also available: these have a density of up to 5000 features per cm2, and require only
100–200 µl of hybridization solution.

hybridization reaction. However, extensive miniaturization of nylon arrays has been difficult because
the resolution of the signal provided by radioactive
probes is poor. Fluorescent probes have a higher
resolution but cannot be used on nylon membranes
because the substrate has a high level of autofluorescence, generating a low signal-to-noise ratio. It has
been possible to produce nylon microarrays with
about 200 µm between features (up to 5000 targets
per cm2) but their analysis requires expensive highresolution imaging devices (Bertucci et al. 1999). An

alternative system, which uses enzymatic rather
than radioactive probes, gives a high-resolution
signal that can be detected with a low-cost scanning
apparatus, but with some loss of sensitivity (Chen
et al. 1998).
A breakthrough in spotted array technology came
with the development of microarrays on glass chips
(Schena et al. 1996, 1998). Glass is an inert substrate and must be coated before DNA will adhere.
Usually, the negatively charged phosphate groups of
DNA are exploited for immobilization on positively

415

Analysis of the transcriptome

PO4– PO4– PO4–
NH3+ NH3+ NH3+
NH3+
NH3+

NH3+
NH3+

NH3+
PO4– PO4– PO4–
NH3+ NH3+ NH3+

NH3+
PO4– PO4– PO4–

Fig. 20.3 DNA binding by electrostatic interactions. Binding of DNA molecules to amine-derivatized surfaces by ionic
interaction between positively charged amino groups and the negatively charged phosphate groups.

(a)

O
CH

O
CH

O
CH

O
CH

O
CH

O
CH
NH2

N
CH

N
CH

N
CH

N
CH

N
CH

N
CH

(b)

O

O

CH2
CH2

CH2
CH2
O

O
CH2
CH2

CH2
CH2
O

O

CH2

NH

NH

CH2

CH

CH

NH

CH2

CH

CH2

CH2

NH2

CH2

NH
CH
CH2

CH2

NH
CH
NH
CH

CH2

CH2

Fig. 20.4 (a) DNA binding by Schiff base reaction. Binding of DNA molecules to aldehyde-derivatized surfaces. An amino
crosslinker is used to covalently attach DNA to the aldehyde-derivatized surface. (b) Binding of DNA molecules to epoxyderivatized slides. An amino crosslinker is used to covalently attach DNA to the epoxy-derivatized surface.

charged surface groups provided e.g. by poly-Llysine; the DNA must then be cross-linked to the
surface (Fig. 20.3). Alternatively, amino groups
can be attached to the DNA and immobilized on
aldehydes or epoxy-derivatized surfaces (Fig. 20.4).
Since glass is non-porous and has very little autofluorescence, fluorescent probes can be used and
they can be applied in very small hybridization volumes. The greater resolution afforded by fluorescent
probes allows feature density to be increased significantly compared to nylon macroarrays, and the
small hybridization volume improves the kinetics of
the reaction. Together, these advantages mean that
more features can be assayed simultaneously with
the same amount of probe without loss of sensitivity.
Thus, glass arrays can routinely be manufactured

with up to 5000 features per square cm. The major
advantage of fluorescent probes, however, is that
different fluorophores can be used to label different RNA populations. These can be simultaneously
hybridized to the same array, allowing differential
gene expression between samples to be monitored
directly (Shalon et al. 1996). The most common
strategy is to use Cy3, which fluoresces bright red,
and Cy5, which fluoresces bright green, to label
different probes. If a particular cDNA is present only
in the Cy3-labeled population, the spot on the array
appears red. If another cDNA is present only in
the Cy5-labeled population, the spot on the array
appears green. cDNAs that are equally represented
in both populations contain equivalent proportions
of each label and appear yellow. In this way, it is

416

CHAPTER 20

Spotted DNA microarray

(a)

DNA

PCR amplification
Purification
Robotic printing

(b)

RNA 1
+ fluor

RNA 2
+ fluor

Hybridize
Wash
Scan 1

Scan 2

Image 1

Image 2

(c)
Combined image
in software

W

X

Y

Z

Fig. 20.5 Spotted DNA arrays. (a) Principle of array
manufacture. Each robotically printed feature corresponds
to one gene or cDNA. (b) Hybridization of glass arrays with
differentially labeled RNA probes followed by scanning on
separate channels to detect fluorescence. (c) Combined
image showing four types of signal: W – genes represented
equally in both RNA populations; X – genes represented only
in RNA 1; Y – genes represented only in RNA 2; Z – genes
represented in neither RNA population. ((a) and (b) redrawn
with permission from Harrington et al. 2000 by permission of
Elsevier Science.)

easy to identify potentially interesting differentially
expressed genes (Fig. 20.5).
Due to the many advantages of glass microarrays,
including their amenability for automated spotting,
this format has emerged as the most popular type
of spotted array for expression profiling. However,
until recently, a major disadvantage was the cost
of production, with the result that the technology

was beyond the reach of all but the best-funded
laboratories. Researchers were faced with the initial
choice of purchasing ready-made arrays from a commercial source or investing in the resources required
for in-house array manufacture. Prefabricated glass
arrays are designed for single use, so a simple series
of experiments with an appropriate number of replicates can carry a hefty price tag. Unfortunately, the
cost of a commercially available precision robot for
array manufacture is even greater: $100,000 or
more even for those with the simplest specifications.
Additionally, clone sets usually need to be purchased to provide the features for a homemade array
(Box 20.3).
Genomic clones tend to be used to derive features
for bacterial arrays because the lack of introns makes
them essentially equivalent to cDNAs. This is also
true in the case of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
where introns are small and few in number. In
higher eukaryotes, where introns are larger and
more common, it is much more convenient to use
cDNAs instead of genomic clones. However, fulllength cDNA clones are neither necessary nor
particularly desirable because of the prevalence of
large gene families with conserved sequences. The
use of partial cDNA sequences that exploit the
differences between related clones avoids crosshybridization. Most of the cDNA sequence information that exists in databases is in the form of ESTs
(Box 9.1), and these are a valuable resource for the
manufacture of spotted arrays.
It is beyond the scope of most laboratories to
prepare comprehensive clone sets de novo for array
manufacture. Only large-scale sequencing projects
can provide the materials and data required to make
comprehensive arrays, and this is the domain of
biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, consortia of academic laboratories, and collaborations
between academic institutes and industry. Typically,
such organizations make their clone sets available
commercially through licensed vendors (for a selected
list, see Box 20.3). An example is the UniGene collection of human (and mouse) clustered, sequenceverified ESTs. This collection is available from Incyte
Genomics and Research Genetics. More recently, the
financial barriers to the general use of microarrays
have begun to fall. This reflects a number of factors,
including competition between companies producing
prefabricated arrays, increasing numbers of universities investing in microarray core facilities, the
availability of protocols that allow robots for array
manufacture to be built in the laboratory for under

417

Analysis of the transcriptome

Box 20.3 Selected sources of clone sets for
the manufacture of spotted arrays
Company

Website

Resources

Research Genetics

http://www.resgen.com

Human UniGene collection
Mouse UniGene collection
Rat cDNA clone collection
Genome-wide Caenorhabditis elegans partial ORF primers
Drosophila cDNA collection
Genome wide Saccharomyces cerevisiae ORF primers
Genome wide S. cerevisiae intergenic primers

Incyte Genomics

http://www.incyte.com

Human UniGene collection
Mouse UniGene collection
8000 Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA clones
Candida albicans complete ORF collection

Genosys Biotech

http://www.genosys.com

Escherichia coli complete ORF collection
Bacillus subtilis complete ORF collection
Partial clone collections for several other bacteria

Fig. 20.7 Principle of array manufacture by capillary
contact printing.

Fig. 20.6 A homemade microarraying robot, which can be
constructed for approximately $30,000. (Reprinted from
Thompson et al. 2001 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

$50,000 (Fig. 20.6), and the development of novel
printing technologies (see below). Instructions for
building arraying robots using simple and readily
available components are available on the Internet
(Box 20.3) and have been discussed in several recent
articles (e.g. see Bowtell 1999, Cheung et al. 1999,
Duggan et al. 1999, Thompson et al. 2001).
There are numerous printing technologies for
spotted arrays
The original method for producing spotted arrays
was contact printing, which involves the use of a
capillary spotting pin (or quill) that draws up a
defined amount of liquid from wells in a microtiter

plate (Fig. 20.7). The pin is then placed in contact
with the array surface, and this causes some liquid
to be deposited. The pin is thoroughly washed and
dried in an automated cycle before returning to the
microtiter dish for the next sample (Duggan et al.
1999, Xiang & Chen 2000). The speed at which
arrays can be produced is increased by using multiplex print heads that deposit samples in a block.
A number of alternative “non-contact” printing
methods are also available. The pin and ring system,
devised at Genetic Microsystems and currently
marketed by Affymetrix, is popular (Fig. 20.8). The
“ring” is inserted into the well of a microtiter plate
and draws up a certain amount of liquid. The “pin”
then extends through the ring and carries a smaller
droplet of solution down onto the array surface.
Non-contact printing technologies have also been
developed for microarray fabrication and include
piezoelectric devices similar to those found in inkjet

418

CHAPTER 20

(a)
Public
database

Glass
wafer

Sequence
selection

Oligomer
synthesis

PM
MM

(b)
RNA 1
+ biotin

RNA 2
+ biotin

Fig. 20.8 A non-contact printing method for array
manufacture. This is the pin and ring system developed by
Genetic Microsystems and currently marketed by Affymetrix.
(Courtesy of Affymetrix.)
Hybridize
Wash

printers, and bubblejet printheads that deposit DNA
samples on the substrate as a bubble extended from
the nozzle (Okamoto et al. 2000). These methods
provide a more uniform spot size, reducing the variation between features.

Stain
Scan

Image 1

Oligonucleotide chips are manufactured by in
situ oligonucleotide synthesis
The alternative to a spotted DNA array is a highdensity prefabricated oligonucleotide chip (Lockhardt
et al. 1996, Lipshutz et al. 1999). These are similar
to DNA arrays in that they consist of gridded DNA
targets that are interrogated by hybridization.
However, while DNA arrays consist of doublestranded clones or PCR products that may be up to
several hundred base pairs in length, oligo chips
contain single-stranded targets ranging from 25–
70 nt. Dual hybridization is not used for expression
profiling on oligo chips. Instead, probes for chip
hybridization are made from cleaved, biotinylated
cRNA (RNA that has been transcribed in vitro from
cDNA). Comparative expression analysis is carried
out by hybridization of alternative cRNA samples to
identical chips, followed by comparison of signal
intensities (Fig. 20.9). Oligo chips can be made in the
same way as spotted DNA arrays, by robotically
transferring chemically synthesized oligonucleotides

Image 2

X
Y
Z

Combined data in software

Fig. 20.9 Oligonucleide chips. (a) Principle of chip
manufacture. Note that sequences are obtained from public
or private databases and sythesized on the chip. Each gene
is represented by 20 non-overlapping oligonucleotides, each
with a perfect match (PM) and mismatch (MM) feature.
(b) Principle of chip hybridization using biotin-labeled
cRNA probes. (Redrawn with permission from Harrington
et al. 2000.)

from microtiter dishes to a solid support, where
they are immobilized (e.g. see Yershov et al. 1996).
However, the maximum array density is increased
almost tenfold if the oligos are printed directly onto
the glass surface.
Direct “on-chip” synthesis of high-density oligonucleotide arrays was developed by Steve Fodor

419

Analysis of the transcriptome

UV light

O

O

O

O

O

O

Mask

OH OH O

O

O

O

A

A

O

O

O

O

O

O

OH OH O

O

A

UV exposure
Quartz wafer
O

O

O

O

O

O

O

O

A

A

G

G

A

A

A

A

O

O

O

O

UV light

Repeat

O

O

A

A

O

O

G

Fig. 20.10 GeneChip fabrication by in situ synthesis by photoactivation and deprotection of nucleic acids. Photomasks are used
to pattern UV light at localized regions to selectively synthesize a patterned array. This method was developed by Affymetrix.

and colleagues at the US biotechnology company
Affymetrix Inc., using a light-directed printing technology known as photolithography (Fodor et al.
1991, 1993, Pease et al. 1994). The procedure is
complex but essentially involves the use of a glass or
silicon wafer that is hydroxylated and silanized so
that DNA can be covalently attached to the surface
in a simple chemical reaction. However, the covalent
binding sites are blocked by a photolabile protecting
group. A chromium mask is then applied to the surface of the chip which determines which areas are
exposed to light. Under illumination, the protecting
groups in these areas are destroyed, allowing the
addition of a single nucleotide, which is also blocked
with a photolabile protecting group. If this process is
repeated using a series of different masks and different nucleotides, a precise grid can be generated containing millions of defined and precisely arrayed
oligos (Fig. 20.10). The process is highly accurate
and allows the production of the densest arrays currently available (up to 64,000 features over an area
slightly larger than 1 cm2 in commercially available
GeneChips, but experimental chips with a density of
>106 targets per cm2 have been produced). However,
the use of physical masks makes the GeneChip very
expensive.
More recently, alternative technologies have been
developed which reduce the capital costs involved
in chip manufacture by employing virtual masks
(Fig. 20.11). For example, NimbleGen Inc. has developed a technology using UV light reflected from
a miniature array of aluminum mirrors to focus
selectively on the appropriate areas of the chip and
destroy the photolabile groups. This is known as the

maskless array synthesizer (MAS) (Singh-Gasson
et al. 1999). Other companies, such as Xeotron Inc.
and Febit GmbH have developed similar maskless
technologies based on digital micromirrors (Gao
et al. 2001). Finally, CombiMatrix Inc. has developed
a system using individually addressable microelectrode arrays to synthesize many different oligonucleotides in situ in parallel reactions (Tesfu et al.
2004).
Spotted arrays and oligo chips have similar
sensitivities
Although subject to some debate, it is believed that
spotted microarrays and high-density oligo chips
perform equally well in terms of sensitivity (see discussion by Granjeaud et al. 1999). An important
difference between the two types of array, however,
is that the manufacture of oligo chips relies entirely
on pre-existing sequence information. Conversely,
spotted DNA arrays can be generated using anonymous (i.e. non-annotated) clones from uncharacterized cDNA libraries, and can therefore be used for
de novo gene discovery. Oligonucleotide chips can be
designed on the basis of genome sequence data or a
collection of cDNA or EST sequences. The advantage of this is that chips can be devised in silico, i.e.
using computer databases as a source of information,
with no need to maintain physical DNA clone sets.
Oligonucleotide arrays are therefore highly advantageous for expression profiling in those organisms
with complete or near-complete genome sequences,
or comprehensive EST collections, but less useful for
other organisms. In contrast, it is quite possible to

420

CHAPTER 20

= Photolabile
protecting
group

Add
G

A

G

G

G

G

T G A
Add

Up to
70 mer

C
C G

G

C
Repeat

C G

G

C

Digital
micromirrors

G

G

UV light

Fig. 20.11 The synthesis of microarrays using NimbleGen Systems MAS technology is very similar to traditional oligonucleotide
synthesis with some important exceptions. Unlike conventional oligo synthesis, arrays are synthesized on glass slides rather than
controlled pore glass supports. Another key difference is that the deprotection steps are performed by photodeprotection rather
than by acid deprotection. The illustration here depicts digital micromirrors reflecting a pattern of UV light, which deprotects the
nascent oligonucleotide and allows addition of the next base.

generate cDNA arrays for largely uncharacterized
organisms, although positive hybridization signals
then have to be further characterized by sequencing
the corresponding clone.
The specificity of hybridization to spotted DNA
arrays is relatively high, due to the length of each
target. As discussed above, distinction between

members of gene families can be achieved by
selecting the least conserved region of the cDNA.
Hybridization specificity is more of a problem
when the target size is smaller, and this has been
addressed in the case of Affymetrix GeneChips by the
use of hybridization controls and redundant targets
(Lipshutz et al. 1999). Each mRNA is represented

Analysis of the transcriptome

by up to 20, non-overlapping oligonucleotides, such
that the likelihood of obtaining a false positive result
is greatly reduced. The chips are designed to contain
both “perfect match” (PM) and “mismatch” (MM)
oligos for each specific target (Fig. 20.9). The perfect match is expected to hybridize along its whole
length, while the mismatch contains a mismatching
base at a central site, thus acting as a control for
cross-hybridization. The signal obtained from the
MM control is subtracted from that of the corresponding PM to reveal the actual level of specific
hybridization. Distinction between members of gene
families is achieved by designing oligos matching
the least conserved regions of the gene.

As transcriptomics technology matures,
standardization of data processing and
presentation become important challenges
The raw data from DNA array experiments are
monochrome images of hybridized arrays. Where
dual fluorescence has been used, images are
obtained on two channels, rendered in false color,
and combined. These visual data must be normalized
(corrected for background) and quantified, and the
algorithms used for this purpose are often provided
with the image-recording apparatus. Background
may be generated by non-specific hybridization,
autofluorescence, dust, and other contaminants or
poor hybridization technique. The background may
not be constant over the entire array, so local background values must be obtained. The final data
provide a measurement of relative expression levels.
These factors, in combination, make it very difficult
to compare results across different experiments
(Quackenbush 2002).
The normalized data from a microarray experiment are generally presented as a gene expression
matrix, which shows the normalized signal intensities for each feature over a range of experimental
conditions. With dual fluorescence, two measurements are taken, one from each channel. In other
cases, readings may be taken from a number of
identical arrays representing e.g. a series of developmental time points or a cell culture exposed to different concentrations of a drug. It is important to have
control features on each array so that the data can be
normalized for variation across arrays. The data
can then be grouped according to similar expression
profiles using a clustering algorithm (reviewed by
Raychaudhuri et al. 2001, Noordewier & Warren
2001, Quackenbush 2001). This involves convert-

421

ing the gene expression matrix into a distance matrix
showing the pairwise differences between the
expression levels of each possible combination of
genes. The data are then clustered to generate a
tree-like graph called a dendrogram. In hierarchical
clustering methods, the two most similar genes are
clustered first and these define a new merged data
point. The analysis is repeated until all the genes are
clustered together. Other popular methods include
k-means clustering, in which the expected number of
clusters is specified at the outset, and the generation
of Kohonen self-organizing maps, a similar process
refined by the use of neural nets. These algorithms
can take a long time to run if the data set is very
large. Run times can be limited by employing feature
reduction strategies, such as the elimination or
merging of redundant and uninformative genes or
expression profiles. Several bioinformatics tools are
available over the Internet to carry out clustering
analysis of microarray expression data, such as the
EPCLUST program, which is part of the Expression
Profiler suite (http://ep.ebi.ac.uk/EP/).
Because of the many different ways in which
microarray data can be obtained, processed, and
presented, there has been an international effort
to develop a set of rules and conventions for the
standardization of microarray data presentation.
The conventions have been devised by the MAGE
(microarray and gene expression) group and are
discussed in detail on the Microarray Gene Expression Database (MGED) (http://www.mged.org) (see
Brazma et al. 2001, Quackenbush 2004). The MIAME
(minimum information about a microarray experiment) standards include six properties of microarray
experiments that can be used as descriptors to ensure
that experiments can be repeated accurately. These
properties are: overall experimental design, array
layout, probe source and labeling method, hybridization procedures and parameters, measurement
and normalization procedure, and details of any
controls. Standard formats for data transfer have
also been proposed, including a microarray and gene
expression object model and markup language
(MAGE-OM, MAGE-ML). One of the primary aims of
MAGE is to persuade all scientific journals to require
that microarray data are deposited in one of three
databases which adhere to the MIAME conventions:
ArrayExpress (Brazma et al. 2003), Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) (Edgar et al. 2002), and the Center
for Information Biology Gene Expression Database
(CIBEX) (Ikeo et al. 2003). More information about
MIAME and MAGE can be found in open letters to
journal editors (Ball et al. 2002, 2004).

422

CHAPTER 20

Expression profiling with DNA arrays has
permeated almost every area of biology
Much of the early literature about DNA microarrays
concerned methodology development and proof-ofprinciple studies. Indeed, between the years 1995
and 1999, the number of published papers describing the theory and practice of array hybridization far
outweighed the number of papers reporting actual
experiments! In the last five years, there has been an
exponential increase in the number of array-based
experiments and the applications are extremely
diverse, covering many different organisms and
ranging from basic studies of biological processes to
clinical applications and pharmacology. Hundreds
of papers reporting microarray data appear each
month, and at least 100 review articles describing
microarray-based analysis of different organisms
and systems were published in 2005. Comprehensive coverage of this burgeoning field would require
an entire book of its own! If any trends at all can be
resolved from this mass of data it is the proliferation
of studies in which microarrays have been used to
study the expression of entire microbial transcriptomes, and the increasing use of microarrays to
investigate different human diseases. The discussion
below relates to these two important topics. Further
applications of expression profiling, e.g. in agriculture, biotechnology, and developmental biology, are
considered in Chapter 26.
Global profiling of microbial gene expression
The first genome-wide expression profiling experiments were reported in 1997. Spotted arrays were
manufactured containing PCR-amplified open reading frames representing most of the 6200 genes in
the S. cerevisiae genome (De Risi et al. 1997, Lashkari
et al. 1997). These investigators analyzed the transcriptional profile of yeast cells shifted from fermentation (anaerobic) to aerobic metabolism, and as
they were subjected to a variety of environmental
manipulations, including heat shock. In each case,
about 5% of the interrogated genes showed highly
significant changes in expression induced by the
experimental conditions, when unstimulated yeast
cells were used as a source of control RNA. Genomewide expression profiling with arrays has also been
carried out for a number of complex biological processes in yeast, such as sporulation (Chu et al. 1998),
the cell cycle (Spellman et al. 1998), and response
to glucose (Gleade et al. 2003). These studies have

allowed tentative functions to be assigned to a number of previously uncharacterized genes, based on
their informative expression patterns. For example,
in the study by Spellman and colleagues, 800 cell
cycle-regulated genes were identified, about 400 of
which were inducible by cyclins. Genes have also
been identified whose expression is dependent on
the ploidy (number of chromosome sets) of the cell
(Galitski et al. 1999). Furthermore, transcriptional
profiling of yeast cells exposed to drugs has allowed
novel drug targets to be identified (e.g. see Marton
et al. 1998, Lockhart 1998).
Affymetrix GeneChips have also been manufactured representing all the ORFs in the yeast genome.
Wodicka and colleagues reported the first use of
GeneChips for transcriptional profiling in yeast,
when they compared yeast grown on minimal and
rich media (Wodicka et al. 1997). The Affymetrix
yeast GeneChip has also been used to profile yeast
cells exposed to alklylating agents (chemicals that
cause damage to DNA). Forty-two genes were found
to be induced by DNA damage, and for almost all of
these genes, the results of the chip experiment were
confirmed by traditional gene-by-gene northern blot
hybridization (Jelinsky & Samson 1999). Genomewide transcriptional analysis of the mitotic cell cycle
has also been carried out (Cho et al. 1998) as well as
a comprehensive analysis of the meiotic transcriptome (Primig et al. 2000).
Bacteria have smaller genomes than yeast, which
should make transcriptional profiling using DNA
arrays a simpler process. An array containing all
4290 genes of the E. coli genome was produced
by Tao et al. (1999) and interrogated using RNA
from bacteria growing on glucose-rich and minimal
medium. Over 200 genes were shown to be induced
on minimal medium, including a number of previously identified stress-response genes. About 120
genes were induced by growth on rich medium,
many of these involved in protein synthesis. Note
that array hybridization in bacteria is complicated
by the difficulty in selectively labeling mRNA. In
eukaryotes, mRNA has a polyadenylated tail which
can be used to selectively prime first-strand cDNA
synthesis, generating a labeled probe devoid of
rRNA and tRNA. Bacterial mRNA generally lacks
a polyadenylate tail, so hybridization is carried out
with total RNA. Nevertheless, the presence of rRNA
does not appear to interfere with the sensitivity of
the hybridization (Richmond et al. 1999). Richmond
and colleagues looked at the genome-wide transcriptional profile of E. coli after exposure to heat shock

Analysis of the transcriptome

and the lactose analog IPTG. They used both glass
microarrays with a fluorescent probe and nylon
arrays with a radioactive probe, finding that the former produced more reliable and consistent results.
Expression profiling in bacteria has also been used to
identify potential new drug targets. For example,
Wilson et al. (1999) exposed Mycobacterium tuberculosis to isoniazid, a drug commonly used to treat
tuberculosis. RNA extracted from treated and untreated bacteria was used to interrogate a genomewide DNA array. As well as identifying genes involved
in the biochemical pathway representing the drug’s
known mode of action, a number of other genes were
induced which could be exploited in the development of novel therapeutics. The effect of BCG (Bacille
Calmette-Guérin) vaccines on M. tuberculosis has
also been investigated by DNA array (Behr et al.
1999).
Over the last few years, there has been a shift
in emphasis in genome-wide array hybridization
experiments. The aim of the expression profiling
studies discussed above has been, essentially, to
assemble a list of genes that are specifically induced
or repressed under particular conditions. With the
development of more sophisticated data analysis
tools, more recent experiments have tracked transcriptional changes over tens or hundreds of different conditions. Clustering these data allows subtle
changes in gene expression patterns to be revealed.
As an example we consider a series of experiments
carried out by Hughes et al. (2000) in which yeast
cells were exposed to drugs such as itraconazole,
which inhibit sterol biosynthesis. This treatment
resulted in significant changes in the expression of
hundreds of genes, suggesting that the drug had
many specific targets in the yeast cell. However, by
looking at the data generated in this experiment in
concert with the expression profiles revealed under
300 other conditions (including various mutants,
chemical treatments, and physiological parameters)
it became apparent that most of the effects were
non-specific, and that the only genes specifically
affected by itraconazole were those involved in the
sterol biosynthetic pathway. The large-scale use of
microarrays in this series of experiments resulted in
a compendium expression database, which allowed
expression profiles over multiple conditions to be
compared. In this way, it was possible not only to
compile lists of co-regulated genes, but also to assign
functions to orphan reading frames and identify
drug targets. Thus an anonymous transcript known
as YER044c was shown to be co-regulated with

423

other sterol biosynthetic genes, strongly indicating a
role in sterol metabolism, and expression of the erg2p
gene was shown to be influenced by the anesthetic
drug dyclonine, suggesting a candidate homologous
target in humans (Hughes et al. 2000). Microarray
experiments have also been carried out using panels
of mutants to test gene functions under a similar
set of conditions (e.g. Giaever et al. 2002, Dassgupt
et al. 2003).
Applications of expression profiling in
human disease
Arrays have been widely used to investigate transcriptional profiles associated with human disease,
and to identify novel disease markers and potential
new drug targets. Many investigators have used
arrays to profile transcriptional changes associated
with cancer and this area of research has been recently
reviewed (Marx 2000, Guo et al. 2003, Russo et al.
2003, Albertson & Pinkel 2003, MacGreggor 2003,
Mischel et al. 2004, Bertucci et al. 2004). In one of
the earliest studies, De Risi and colleagues used
cDNA arrays to investigate the ability of human
chromosome 6 to suppress the tumorigenic phenotype of the melanoma cell line UACC-903 (De Risi
et al. 1996). A number of novel tumor-suppressor
genes were identified. Spotted cDNA arrays have
also been used to investigate global gene expression
in rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease (Heller et al. 1997), insulin resistance (Aitman
et al. 1999), and asthma (Syed et al. 1999). In some
cases, the investigation of global gene expression
profiles has led to the discovery of novel links
between biological processes. For example, Iyer
et al. (1999) investigated the transcriptional profile
of serum-starved cells following the addition of fresh
serum, using a human cDNA array containing
approximately 8600 genes. While many of the genes
induced at early time points were well-characterized
proliferation-response genes, the investigators also
found that a large number of genes induced at later
time points were known to be involved in the wound
response, an example being FGF7. A functional link
between serum starvation and wounding had not
previously been identified. Affymetrix produce a
range of different chips for human, mouse, and plant
genomes in addition to yeast and bacteria, thus
human GeneChips have also been used for disease
profiling. For example, the HUGeneF1 chip contains
features representing nearly 7000 human genes.
This was interrogated using RNA from human

424

CHAPTER 20

foreskin fibroblasts at several time points after infection with human cytomegalovirus (Zhu et al. 1998).
One day post-infection, 364 transcripts were shown
to have undergone significant changes in expression
level and it is likely that some of these may strongly
influence the progress of the infection, and could
represent useful drug targets.
As array technology has matured, one emerging
application with an important impact on medicine is
the use of expression profiling for the classification of
tumors. Unlike the clustering approaches discussed
above, which are unsupervised (i.e. there are no
predefined groups), tumor classification is a supervised type of analysis (i.e. the data are placed into
categories that have already been defined). Different
forms of cancer are generally identified by a histological phenotype, which is subject to visual interpretation and human error. Recently, a number of
studies have shown that gene expression profiles
can be a useful way to classify tumors, and that such
profiles can be defined more rigorously. For example,
a systematic study of 60 diverse cancer cell lines
held at the National Cancer Institute using an array
containing about 10,000 cDNAs showed that each
line could be distinguished clearly on the basis of its
expression profile (Ross et al. 2000). The same cell
lines have recently been profiled to determine relationships between RNA levels and drug responses
(Scherf et al. 2000).
Expression profiling has also been useful for distinguishing very similar types of cancer, an approach
called class prediction where subtypes of a disease are
known, and class discovery where they are not. For
example, Perou and colleagues have used expression
profiling to distinguish different classes of breast
cancer (Perou et al. 1999, 2000), while Golub et al.
(1999) used the self-organizing maps algorithm to
analyze the transcriptional profiles of a number of
leukemia samples, correctly placing them into the
two known categories: acute myeloid (AML) and
acute lymphoblastic (ALL). An array containing
7000 cDNAs was used in this analysis, and about
50 genes were shown to be differentially expressed.
Similarly, Alizadeh et al. (2000) used the 18,000gene “lymphochip” array available from Research
Genetics to study non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Interestingly, this experiment revealed two previously

unknown subclasses of the disease with different
clinical characteristics. Bittner et al. (2000) have used
expression profiling for class discovery in cutaneous
melanoma, and were also able to distinguish aggressive metastatic melanomas through the analysis of
microarray hybridization results. In each of these
studies, prediction of the correct type of cancer will
help to ensure appropriate treatment is carried out,
and the microarray experiments themselves may
even reveal novel drug targets.

Suggested reading
Schena M., Shalon D., Davis R.W. & Brown P.O. (1995)
Quantitative monitoring of gene expression patterns
with a complementary DNA microarray. Science
270, 467–70.
Veculescu V.E., Zhang L., Vogelstein B. & Kinzler K.W.
(1995) Serial analysis of gene expression. Science
270, 484–7.
Two seminal papers in the development of high-throughput
expression profiling at the mRNA level.
Altman R.B. & Raychaudhuri S. (2001) Whole-genome
expression analysis: challenges beyond clustering.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 11, 340–7.
Blohm D.H. & Guiseppe-Elie A. (2001) New developments in microarray technology. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology 12, 41–7.
Bowtell D.D.L. (1999) Options available – from start to
finish – for obtaining expression data by microarray.
Nature Genetics 21, 25–32.
Lander E.S. (1999) Array of hope. Nature Genetics 21,
3–4.
Lipshutz R.J., Fodor S.P.A., Gingeras T.R. & Lockhart
D.J. (1999) High density synthetic oligonucleotide
arrays. Nature Genetics 21, 20–4.
Lorkowski S. & Cullen P. (2001) High-throughput
analysis of mRNA expression: microarrays are not
the whole story. Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents
14, 377–403.
Quackenbush J. (2002) Microarray data normalization
and transformation. Nature Genetics 32, 496–501.
Shoemaker D.D. & Linsley P.S. (2002) Recent developments in DNA microarrays. Current Opinion in
Microbiology 5, 334–7.
Venkatasubbarao S. (2004) Microarrays – status and
prospects. Trends in Biotechnology 12, 631–7.
A selection of excellent reviews charting the development
of array technology for expression profiling, and recent
advances in manufacture, methodology, and data analysis.

CHAPTER 21
Proteomics I – Expression analysis and
characterization of proteins

Introduction
As discussed in the previous chapter, important
insights into gene function can be gained by studying gene expression at the mRNA level. However,
analysis of the transcriptome has several disadvantages reflecting the fact that mRNA represents an
early stage of gene expression whereas, for most
genes, the protein is the final, functional molecule in
the cell. One disadvantage is that the abundance of a
given transcript may not reflect the abundance of the
corresponding protein due to post-transcriptional
gene regulation; not all mRNAs are translated at the
same rate and some may not be translated at all (Gygi
et al. 1999). Second, protein diversity is often generated after transcription, sometimes by the synthesis
of two or more types of protein from a given mRNA,
but more often by post-translational modification
(e.g. glycosylation, phosphorylation). Since protein
activity is often dependent on post-translational
modification, the abundance of a protein per se
may not represent the level of protein activity in
the cell. Finally the function of a protein may also
depend on its localization, and trafficking between
compartments can sometimes be used in a regulatory manner (e.g. to control the activity of transcription factors). Therefore, even the abundance of a
correctly modified protein cannot be guaranteed to
represent the true intracellular activity of the protein. All these factors must be taken into account
in functional analyses and can only be addressed by
studying proteins directly.
The entire complement of proteins synthesized
by a given cell or organism has been termed the
proteome (see Wasinger et al. 1995). The field of proteomics, the global study of proteins, has developed
from this concept (Twyman 2004). In one sense,
proteomics is the direct equivalent of transcriptomics, i.e. the study of protein expression and abundance. However, because proteins are functional
molecules rather than simply information carriers,
they are a much richer source of data than nucleic

acids. Proteins can be studied in terms of sequence
and abundance (like mRNAs) but also relevant are
three-dimensional structure, modification, localization, biochemical and physiological function, and
interactions with other proteins and other molecules.
The next three chapters explore these topics; the
current chapter focuses on protein expression analysis and methods for high-throughput protein
characterization.

Protein expression analysis is more
challenging than mRNA profiling
because proteins cannot be amplified
like nucleic acids
The global analysis of protein expression presents
some technical hurdles that are not found in transcriptional profiling, and these reflect the concepts
of target abundance and molecular recognition.
Transcriptional profiling using arrays depends on
two processes: the ability to selectively amplify particular DNA molecules as targets for hybridization
(this may be achieved by molecular cloning, PCR
amplification, or direct synthesis in the case of oligonucleotides), and the ability of the probe to hybridize
to all targets under similar conditions. Since all
DNA and RNA molecules, regardless of sequence,
obey similar hybridization kinetics, thousands of
DNA sequences arrayed on a solid substrate can
be hybridized simultaneously with a heterogeneous
probe. For proteins, there is no amplification procedure as can be applied to nucleic acids, and molecular recognition is mediated by antibodies, other
proteins, or other ligands, and for each type of
protein the reaction kinetics are distinct. Therefore, while there has been considerable interest in
the development of protein microarrays as a direct
parallel to DNA microarrays, the difficulty with determining a standard set of conditions for molecular
recognition has pushed proteomic research in alternative directions. Currently, the most widely used

426

CHAPTER 21

technologies for proteome analysis are protein separation by 2D-electrophoresis and/or multidimensional
liquid chromatography followed by annotation using
high-throughput mass spectrometry.

surrounding pH and its net charge is zero. Size fractionation is achieved by equilibrating the isoelectricfocusing gel in a solution of the detergent sodium
dodecylsulfate (SDS), which binds non-specifically to
all proteins and confers a uniform negative charge.
The focused proteins are then separated in the perpendicular plane to the first separation (Fig. 21.1). In
the original study (O’Farrell 1975), E. coli proteins
were separated by isoelectric focusing in a tube gel,
i.e. a gel cast in a thin plastic tube. When the IEF
run was complete, the tube was cracked open and
the proteins exposed to SDS by immersion of the gel
in an SDS solution. The tube gel was then attached to
an SDS-PAGE slab gel, i.e. a flat gel cast between two
plates, and the proteins were separated by size. The
basic procedure for 2DGE has changed little since
this time although the rather cumbersome tube gels
have been largely replaced by strip gels, which are
easier to handle and give more reproducible separations. Additionally, the pH gradients were initially
established using synthetic carrier ampholytes,
which are collections of small amphoteric buffering
molecules with pI values corresponding to the pH
range of the focusing gel. These are mobile and have
a tendency to drift towards the cathode of the gel,
distorting the separation. They have been largely
replaced with immobilized pH gradient gels (IPG
gels) in which the buffering groups are attached to
the gel matrix (Gorg et al. 2000).

There are two major technologies for
protein separation in proteomics
Two-dimensional electrophoresis produces
a visual display of the proteome
Technology for the global analysis of protein
expression was established in 1975, following the
development of a two-dimensional polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) procedure that could
be applied to complex protein mixtures such as those
extracted from whole cells and tissues (Klose 1975,
Scheele 1975). The method involved first-dimension
isoelectric focusing (i.e. separation of proteins
according to charge) followed by second-dimension
fractionation according to molecular mass. In the
first application of this technology, 1000 proteins
from the bacterium Escherichia coli were resolved on
a single gel (O’Farrell 1975).
The principle of isoelectric focusing (IEF) is that
electrophoresis is carried out in a pH gradient, allowing each protein to migrate to its isoelectric point,
i.e. the point at which its pI value is equivalent to the
+
Low pH

Low pH

Equilibrate in SDS
Transfer focusing gel to SDS gel
apply orthogonal electric field

Apply electric field

–

High pH

+

High pH
–

Fig. 21.1 Two-dimensional electrophoresis using a tube gel for isoelectric focusing and a slab gel for SDS-PAGE. The proteins are
separated in the first dimension on the basis of charge and in the second dimension on the basis of molecular mass. The circles
represent proteins, with shading to indicate protein pI values and diameters representing molecular mass. The dotted line shows
the direction of separation.

Proteomics I – Expression analysis and characterization of proteins

427

(a)

(b)

Fig. 21.2 Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of mouse liver proteins followed by silver staining. (a) Wide immobilized pH
gradient (3–12). (b) Narrow immobilized pH gradient (5–6) showing much greater resolution of proteins. (Reproduced with
permission from Angelika Görg and Electrophoresis.)

After fractionation, the protein gel is stained.
There is a wide choice of agents capable of staining
proteins non-specifically, including silver nitrate
and dyes such as Coomassie brilliant blue, which are
commonly used on western blots. For proteomics
applications, however, these agents lack the sensitivity to detect scarce proteins, they have a narrow
linear range, and silver staining can introduce covalent modifications which interfere with further analysis by mass spectrometry (see below). Therefore, a
new series of reagents has been developed with proteomics very much in mind. These are highly sensitive fluorescent stains known as SYPRO dyes, which
are sensitive, have a broad linear range, and do not
introduce covalent modifications into proteins (Lim
et al. 1997). The outcome is a unique pattern of dots,
each dot representing a protein, providing a fingerprint of the proteins in the cell (Fig. 21.2).
The sensitivity, resolution, and representation
of 2D gels need to be improved
It is possible to resolve approximately 2000–3000
proteins on a standard 2D gel, but many of these
represent the abundant and superabundant classes,
whereas the rarest proteins (often the most interesting) are difficult to detect (Rabilloud 2002). The
proteins in a cell differ in abundance over four to six
orders of magnitude, with most of the total protein
content represented by a relatively small number of
abundant or superabundant proteins. In yeast, for
example, it is estimated that 50% of the proteome
comprises the output of just 100 genes and that the
most abundant proteins are present at levels exceed-

ing 1,000,000 copies per cell. Increasing the resolution of a 2DGE separation can increase the chance of
detecting rare proteins because the small spots are
less likely to be masked by the large spots of abundant proteins. The resolution of 2DGE depends on
the separation length in both dimensions, and can
thus be increased if very large format gels are used
(reviewed by Herbert et al. 2001), or if multiple IEF
gels are run, each with a narrow pH range (these are
known as zoom gels; Fig. 21.2) (Sanchez et al. 1997,
Rabilloud et al. 1997). Alternatively, to increase the
resolution of proteins within a particular pH range,
gels can be run with non-linear pH gradients preferably with a flattened pH gradient between pH 4
and 7, which accounts for the majority of proteins
(Fig. 21.2). Strategies to increase the resolution of
IEF gels are often facilitated by pre-fractionation, e.g.
to remove proteins outside the pH range of a zoom
gel since these can accumulate at the electrodes and
distort the focusing of the remaining proteins.
Because proteins are so diverse in terms of their
chemical and physical properties, it is virtually
impossible to devise a method that leads to the
unbiased representation of all proteins on a 2D gel.
The most important factor in determining which
proteins are represented is the solubilization step,
and for general applications the procedure has not
changed very much since it was first developed in
1975. The standard lysis buffer includes a chaotropic
agent to disrupt hydrogen bonds (urea, or a combination of urea and thiourea), a non-ionic detergent
such as NP-40, and a reducing agent. These conditions are not suitable for the solubilization of
membrane proteins and this is why membrane

428

CHAPTER 21

proteins are under-represented on standard 2D gels.
The recovery of membrane proteins can be increased
by choosing stronger detergents, such as CHAPS,
and by selectively enriching the initial sample for
membrane proteins, e.g. by preparing membrane
fractions (Gorg et al. 2000).
Multiplexed analysis allows protein expression
profiles to be compared on single gels
While the analysis of a single protein sample by
2DGE can be useful, e.g. for cataloging the proteins
present in a given cell or tissue, the comparison of
gels prepared using related samples (e.g. disease
vs. normal tissue) can reveal protein spots that are
differentially expressed. Unfortunately, the large
number and complex distribution of spots on a
typical 2D gel means that comparisons across gels
are extremely difficult, and must be carried out using
image analysis software. One problem with this
is that, due to minor variations in the chemical
and physical properties of electrophoretic gels, it is
impossible to exactly reproduce the conditions from
one experiment to another. Gel-matching software,
such as the freely available program MELANIE II
(www.expasy.ch/ch2d/melanie), typically works by
establishing the positions of unambiguous landmark
spots and then stretching, skewing, and rotating
parts of the image to match other spots. This may
involve calculating values for spot intensities and
interspot distances between neighboring spots as
variables in the algorithm (reviewed by Pleissner
et al. 2001). Another useful program is the Java
applet CAROL (http://gelmatching.inf.fu-berlin.de/
Carol.html) which can be used to compare any two
gel images over the Internet.
More recently, the difficulties encountered in running multiple gels and comparing spot patterns have
been addressed by the development of techniques for
multiplexed proteomics. One example is difference
gel electrophoresis, which employs dual fluorescent
labels applied separately to different protein samples,
which are then loaded onto the same gel (Lilley et al.
2001). The principle is similar to DNA microarray
experiments using dual labels and the signal intensities from each probe show the relative abundance
of each protein in each sample. Different protein
samples are labeled on lysine side chains with
succinimidyl esters of propyl-Cy3 and methyl-Cy5,
two fluorophores that emit light at different wavelengths. The protein samples are mixed prior to
separation and loaded onto the 2D gel together. After
electrophoresis, the gel is scanned using a CCD

camera or fluorescence reader fitted with two different filters and two sets of data are obtained. The
images from each filter can be pseudocolored and
combined, immediately revealing the spots representing proteins with differential abundance (Fig. 21.3).
The use of further labels, e.g. Cy2, can allow even
more samples to be run concurrently. Because the
samples run together, all differences in gel preparation, running conditions, and local gel structure are
eliminated, which considerably simplifies the downstream analysis.
The advantages of DIGE in terms of data analysis
are undeniable, but the technique also has its drawbacks in that the fluorescent labels used are less
sensitive than both SYPRO dyes and silver staining.
This primarily reflects the fact that only a small proportion of the proteins in each sample can be labeled
otherwise solubility is lost and the proteins precipitate during electrophoresis. A further consequence
of partial labeling is that the bulky fluorescent conjugate retards the proteins during the SDS-PAGE
separation so the gels must be post-stained, e.g.
with Coomassie brilliant blue, to identify the “true”
protein spot to be excised for downstream analysis
by mass spectrometry. Registration errors between
the labeled and unlabeled protein populations are
minimized during isoelectric focusing because the
fluorescent conjugates are charge matched.
The sensitivity of standard gels can be combined
with the convenience of multiplex fluorescence in a
new area of multiplexed proteomics in which the
same SYPRO reagent is used to stain and compare
protein spots on different gels, but the gels can also be
stained with additional reagents that identify specific
classes of proteins (Patton & Beecham 2001, Patton
2000). These proteins can be used as landmarks for
gel matching but more importantly the technique
can be used to identify subsets of proteins in the
proteome that share specific functional attributes. A
number of stains have been developed by companies
such as Molecular Probes Inc. that recognize various
structurally or functionally related proteins, e.g.
glycoproteins and phosphoproteins, oligo-histidine
tagged proteins, calcium-binding proteins, and proteins that have the capability to bind or metabolize
particular drugs.
Multidimensional liquid chromatography is
more sensitive than 2DGE and is directly
compatible with mass spectrometry
Liquid chromatography (LC) is often used either
upstream of 2DGE to pre-fractionate samples or

Proteomics I – Expression analysis and characterization of proteins

Fig. 21.3 2D DIGE overlay image of Cy3- (green) and
Cy5- (red) labeled test-spiked Erwinia carotovora proteins.
The protein test spikes were three conalbumin isoforms
(arrowheads) and two myoglobin isoforms (arrows). Spots
that are of equal intensity between the two channels appear
yellow in the overlay image. As spike proteins were eight
times more abundant in the Cy5 channel, they appear as red
spots in the overlay. The gel is oriented with the acidic end to
the left. Reprinted from Lilley et al. (2002) Two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis: recent advances in sample preparation,
detection and quantitation. Current Opinion in Chemical
Biology 6, 46–50. © 2002, with permission from Elsevier.

downstream to separate tryptic peptides prepared
from individual gel spots (see below). However, the
flexibility of LC methods in terms of combining different separative principles makes multidimensional
chromatography an attractive technology to replace
2DGE all together. Many of the limitations of 2DGE
are circumvented by LC systems. For example, HPLC
columns allow the loading of large sample volumes,
which can be concentrated on the column making
low-abundance proteins easier to detect. Many of the
proteins that are difficult to analyze by 2DGE (e.g.
membrane proteins, very basic proteins) can be
separated easily using appropriate resins. Proteins
separated in the liquid phase do not need to be
stained in order to be detected. Perhaps most importantly, the fact that LC methods can separate peptides
as well as proteins, and the ability to couple LC
columns directly to the mass spectrometer mean
that the entire analytical process from sample preparation to peptide mass profiling can be automated.
The disadvantages of LC methods are that the visual
aspects of protein separation by 2DGE are lost,
including the pI and molecular mass data that can be
determined from the positions of spots on the gel
(these data can be used in database searches). LC is
also a serial analysis technique, while multiple gels

429

containing related samples can be run at the same
time.
The sequential application of different chromatographic techniques exploiting different physical or
chemical separative principles can provide sufficient
resolution for the analysis of very complex protein
or peptide mixtures (Wang & Hanash 2003, Wehr
2002). For example, the sequential use of ionexchange chromatography (which separates proteins
by charge) and RP-HPLC (which separates proteins
approximately in a mass-dependent fashion) can
achieve the same resolution as 2DGE, with added
advantages of automation, increased sensitivity,
and better representation of membrane proteins.
However, it is necessary to consider the practical limitations of such multidimensional chromatography
techniques. The first issue to address is the compatibility of the buffers and solvents used in different
steps of each procedure. In the example discussed
above, the elution buffer used in the first-dimension
ion-exchange step would have to be a suitable
solvent for RP-HPLC, and the elution buffer for the
second-dimension RP-HPLC step would need to be
compatible with the solvents used in the sample
preparation stage for mass spectrometry. Otherwise,
many of the advantages of speed, resolution, and
automation would be lost as the fractions were taken
off line to be cleaned up and prepared.
Fortunately, the solvents and buffers described
above are indeed compatible, and ion exchange
followed by RP-HPLC-MS has been used by several
investigators to analyze the proteomes of organisms
ranging from yeast to humans. The compatibility of
RP-HPLC with the solvents used in mass spectrometry means that HPLC is almost universally used as
the final separation method in multidimensional
chromatography. Several other profiling methods,
such as size exclusion chromatography (Lecchi et al.
2003), ion-exchange chromatography (Wang &
Hanash 2003), have been used as a first-dimension
separation method in combination with HPLC,
sometimes with a prior affinity chromatography step
resulting in a tri-dimensional separation strategy
(Lee & Lee 2004).
Initially, multidimensional chromatography was
achieved by a discontinuous process in which fractions were collected from the ion-exchange or gel
filtration column and then manually injected into
the HPLC column (Gygi et al. 1999a). Although
labor intensive, the advantage of a discontinuous
multidimensional system is the absence of time constraints. The fractions eluting from the first column
can be stored offline indefinitely, and fed one-by-one

430

CHAPTER 21

into the HPLC column, which is directly coupled to the
mass spectrometer. A further advantage is that large
sample volumes can be applied to the first column in
order to obtain sufficient amounts of low-abundance
proteins for analysis in the second dimension.
The need for manual sample injection can be
circumvented by equipping the first column with an
automatic fraction collection system and a columnswitching valve. Fractions are then collected from
the first column across the elution range, and the
switching valve can bring the RP-HPLC column in
line to receive the fractions sequentially. Alternatively, some researchers have developed apparatus
comprising a single ion-exchange column coupled,
via an appropriate set of switching valves, to multiple HPLC columns arranged in parallel (Fig. 21.4).
In this scheme, fractions emerging from the first column are directed sequentially to the multiple HPLC
columns, and the cycle is repeated when the first
column has been regenerated (Opitek et al. 1998).
A third strategy for multidimensional chromatography separations is the use of biphasic columns,
in which the distal part of the column is filled with
reversed-phase resin and the proximal part with

another type of matrix. As long as the elution solvents for each type of resin do not interfere with each
other, this allows the stepped elution of fractions
from the first resin and the gradient elution of seconddimension fractions from the second. This technique
was pioneered by Link and colleagues as direct analysis of large protein complexes (DALPC) and was
modified by Yates and colleagues into a system called
multidimensional protein identification technology
(MudPIT) (see Washburn et al. 2001). As shown in
Fig. 21.5, peptide mixtures loaded onto the ionexchange resin were eluted using a stepped gradient
of salt, resulting in the release of first-dimension
fractions into the reversed-phase resin. Seconddimension fractions were then eluted from the
reversed-phase resin into the mass spectrometer
using a gradient of acetonitrile. This process, and the
subsequent regeneration step, did not interfere
with the ion-exchange chromatography step, and
after regeneration another fraction was released
from the ion-exchange resin by increasing the salt
concentration. When this method was applied to the
yeast proteome, over 5000 peptides could be assigned
to a total of 1484 yeast proteins, representing about

HPLC pump

Injector

Size exclusion
columns (6)

HPLC pump

Valve

HPLC column 2

HPLC column 1

Valve

UV detector

ESI-MS

Waste

Fig. 21.4 Continuous multidimensional chromatography with column switching. In this example, simplified from Opiteck et al.
(1998) two HPLC columns working in parallel receive alternating eluates from a bank of six size exclusion columns in series. After
sample injection and separation by size exclusion chromatography, eluate from the size exclusion columns is directed to HPLC
column 1 using a four-port valve (thick line). While the peptides are trapped in this column, HPLC column 2 is eluted and the
sample is directed to the detector and fraction collector (broken line). After flushing and equilibrating column 2, the valves are
reversed allowing column 2 to be loaded with the next fraction from the size exclusion separation, while column 1 is eluted.

Proteomics I – Expression analysis and characterization of proteins

40 mm

SCX resin

100 mm

C18 resin

Fig. 21.5 Continuous multidimensional chromatography
using a biphasic column. In this example, simplified from the
MudPIT method (Washburn et al. 2001) a 140 mm × 0.1 mm
fused silica capillary is packed at the distal end with 5-µm C18
(reversed phase) particles and at the proximal end with 5-µm
strong cation exchange (SCX) particles.

one-quarter of the yeast proteome. The sample
appeared to be representative of all classes of proteins, including those usually under-represented in
2DGE experiments.

Mass spectrometry is used for protein
characterization
High-throughput protein annotation is
achieved by mass spectrometry and
correlative database searching
As early as the beginning of the 1980s, it was suggested that a 2DE database should be established to
catalog human proteins and identify proteins whose
presence or absence was associated with disease
(Anderson & Anderson 1982). However, because
there was little information available in sequence
databases and no high-throughput techniques for
protein annotation, such differentially expressed
proteins often remained uncharacterized. In the

431

mid-1980s, the first convenient methods for protein sequencing became available. This began with
the development of automated Edman degradation
“sequenators”, and a few years later a method was
devised for blotting 2D gels onto PVDF (polyvinylidine difluoride) membranes, which allowed direct
protein sequencing. Although Edman degradation is
sensitive and perhaps remains the most convenient
method for determining N-terminal sequences, it
is insufficient to cope with the vast amounts of
data arising from today’s 2DE experiments. A breakthrough in high-throughput protein annotation
came with improvements in mass spectrometry
techniques coupled with the development of algorithms allowing protein databases to be searched on
the basis of molecular mass (Yates 2000, Anderson
& Mann 2000, Lahm & Langen 2000, Paterson
2000, Mann & Pandey 2001).
Mass spectrometry involves the ionization of target
molecules in a vacuum, and accurate measurement
of the mass of the resulting ions. A mass spectrometer has three component parts: an ionizer, which
converts the anylate into gas phase ions; a mass
analyzer which separates the ions according to their
mass/charge ratio (m/z); and an ion detector. Generally, large molecules such as proteins and nucleic
acids are broken up and degraded by the ionization
procedure, but more recently, sensitive instruments
that are capable of soft ionization, i.e. the ionization of
large molecules without significant degradation, have
been developed. This allows accurate mass measurements of whole proteins and peptide fragments, data
that can be used to search protein databases to identify particular proteins (Fig. 21.6).
Two major strategies are used to characterize proteins (Aebersold & Mann 2003). The first is peptide
mass fingerprinting, which is often carried out using a
mass spectrometer with an electrospray ionization
(ESI) or a matrix assisted laser desorption ionization
(MALDI) source coupled with a time of flight (TOF)
analyzer. A glossary of these terms is provided in
Box 21.1. Briefly, protein spots are excised from a 2D
gel and digested with a specific endopeptidase, such
as trypsin, to generate peptide fragments. These are
then analyzed by mass spectrometry to determine
their molecular masses, and these data are used
to search protein databases. Computer algorithms
have been developed by a number of groups for correlating MS-determined peptide masses with virtual
peptide masses derived from protein databases
(Henzel et al. 1993, James et al. 1993, Mann et al.
1993, Pappin et al. 1993, Yates et al. 1993). The

432

CHAPTER 21

Protein samples

Resolve
complex mixtures

2-D gel
electrophoresis

Affinity
chromotography

Individual protein spots

Protein complexes

Protein chips

Individual proteins
Simple mixtures
Protein complexes

Digestion
mass
spectrometry

MALDI-TOF
Peptide mass
fingerprinting

MS/MS
Fragment ion
analysis

Database search

searches are useful only if a significant amount of
sequence data exists, i.e. in the case of organisms
with complete or well-advanced genome projects. In
yeast, for example, it has been possible to calculate
the masses of the tryptic peptide fragments from
every protein, based on the translation of all known
open reading frames (ORFs), thus allowing rapid
and precise protein annotation. Unfortunately, EST
sequences are not useful for peptide mass fingerprinting because the algorithms require correlation
between the masses of several peptide fragments
from the same protein and a given database entry.
ESTs are generally too short to represent a significant
number of peptide fragments. The problem is compounded by the propensity for MS data not to agree
with stored sequences. This may reflect genuine
sequence errors in some cases, but often occurs due
to unrecognized post-translational modifications to
the protein, non-specific proteolysis, the presence of
contaminating proteins, or the absence of a particular sequence from the database. The accuracy of
the MS measurement may also vary, although this
has been addressed by the development of improved
MALDI-MS instruments with ion-focusing mirrors
and delayed extraction devices, which help to reduce
their spread of kinetic energy and thus increase
accuracy and resolution.

MS/MS
Peptide ladder
analysis

Direct
sequencing

Fig. 21.6 Current
routes to protein
annotation in
proteomics.

Where peptide mass fingerprinting fails to
identify any proteins matching those present in a
given sample, the fragments of one or more individual peptides may provide important additional
information (Lamond & Mann 1997; reviewed by
Choudhary et al. 2001a,b). The data can be used
in two ways. First, the uninterpreted fragment ion
masses can be used in correlative database searching
to identify proteins whose peptides would likely yield
similar CID spectra (collision-induced dissociation;
see Box 21.1) under the same fragmentation conditions. In probability-based matching, virtual CID
spectra are derived from the peptides of all protein
sequences in the database and these are compared
with the observed data to derive a list of potential
matches. In cross-correlation, it is the degree of overlap between the observed and predicted peaks that
determines the best potential match. Several algorithms, such as Sequest (Fenyo 2000, Chakravarti et
al. 2002), are available for database searching with
uninterpreted data. Second, the peaks of the mass
spectrum can be interpreted, either manually or automatically, to derive partial de novo peptide sequences
that can be used as standard database search
queries. The advantage of both these approaches is
that correlative searching is not limited to databases
of full protein sequences. Both uninterpreted

Box 21.1 Glossary of terms used in mass spectrometry,
and useful Internet resources
Mass spectrometry
A technique for accurately determining
molecular masses by calculating the
mass : charge ratio of ions in a vacuum.
A mass spectrometer is an instrument
combining a source of ions, a mass analyzer
that can separate ions according to their
mass : charge ratio, and an ion detector.
Soft ionization
The ionization of large molecules, such as
proteins and nucleic acids, without causing
significant amounts of fragmentation.
Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization (MALDI)
A soft ionization method used for peptide
mass fingerprinting. The analyte, a mixture
of peptide fragments resulting from tryptic
digestion of a particular protein, is first mixed
with a light-absorbing “matrix compound”
such as dihydroxybenzoic acid, in an organic
solvent. The solvent is then evaporated to
form crystals and these are transferred to a
vacuum. The dry crystals are targeted with a
laser beam. The laser energy is absorbed and
then emitted (desorbed) as heat, resulting in
expansion of the matrix and anylate into the
gas phase. A high voltage is applied across
the sample to ionize it, and the ions are
accelerated towards the detector.

the potential difference applied across
the ion stream, allowing ions of different
mass : charge ratios to be directed towards the
detector. A quadrupole comprises four metal
rods, pairs of which are electrically connected
and carry opposing voltages that can be
controlled by the operator. More than one
quadrupole may be connected in series, as in
triple quadrupole mass spectrometry. Varying
the voltage steadily over time allows a mass
spectrum to be obtained.
Time of flight (TOF)
A mass analyzer that determines the
mass : charge ratio of an ion by measuring
the time taken by ions to travel down a flight
tube to the detector (Karas & Hillenkamp
1988).
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)
Mass spectrometry using an instrument with
two mass analyzers, either of the same type or
a mixture. A number of hybrid quadrupole/
TOF instruments have been described (e.g.
Krutchinsky et al. 2000, Shevchenko et al.
2000). The mass analyzers may be separated
by a collision cell that contains inert gas and
causes ions to dissociate. MS/MS is generally
used for fragment ion analysis, because
particular peptide fragments can be selected
using the first mass analyzer, fragmented in
the collision cell and the fragments can be
separated in the second analyzer.

Electrospray ionization (ESI)
A soft ionization method used for fragment ion
searching. The analyte is dissolved in an
appropriate solvent and pushed through
a narrow capillary. A potential difference is
applied across the capillary such that charged
droplets emerge and form a fine spray. Under
a stream of heated inert gas, each droplet
rapidly evaporates so that the solvent is
removed as the analyte enters the mass
analyser and the ions are accelerated
towards the detector.
Quadrupole
A mass analyzer that determines the
mass : charge ratio of an ion by varying

Collision-induced dissociation (CID)
The use of a collision cell between mass
analyzers to excite ions and make them
dissociate into fragments.
Mass spectrometry resources on the
Internet (peptide mass and fragment
fingerprinting tools)
http://www.expasy.ch/tools/#proteome
http://www.seqnet.dl.ac.uk/Bioinformatics/
http://www.narrador.emblheidelberg.de/GroupPages/PageLink/
peptidesearchpage.html
http://prospector.ucsf.edu

434

CHAPTER 21

fragment ion masses and the short peptide sequences
derived from interpreted spectra can be used to search
through the less robust but much more abundant
EST data. Millions of ESTs have been obtained and
deposited in public databases, and when translated
they represent a rich source of information about
proteins. However, ESTs cannot be searched in peptide mass fingerprinting because that technique relies
on the presence of sequences corresponding to several
intact peptides. ESTs are generally too short (100–
300 bp) to contain more than one intact peptide.
Specialized strategies are used to quantify
proteins directly by mass spectrometry
Protein quantitation at the mass spectrometry stage
makes it possible to use in-line liquid-phase separation methods such as multidimensional chromatography and capillary electrophoresis (see above). The
general approach is to label alternative samples with
equivalent reagents, one of which contains a heavy
isotope and one of which contains a light isotope.
The samples are mixed, separated into fractions, and
analyzed by mass spectrometry. The ratio of the two
isotopic variants can be determined from the heights
of the peaks in the mass spectra and used to identify proteins with differential abundance. Several
(a) In vitro labeling

variants of the approach can be used which are
discussed below and summarized in Fig. 21.7.
One of the first developments in quantitative mass
spectrometry was a class of reagents known as
isotope-coded affinity tags (ICATs) (Gygi et al. 1999).
These are biotinylated derivatives of iodoacetamide,
a reagent that reacts with the cysteine side chains
of denatured proteins. Two versions of the reagent
are used, one normal or light form and one heavy
or deuterated form in which a hydrogen atom is
replaced by deuterium. The heavy and light forms
are used to label different protein samples and then
the proteins are combined and digested with trypsin.
The biotin allows cysteine-containing peptides to be
isolated from the complex peptide mixture through
affinity to streptavidin, therefore considerably simplifying the number of different peptides entering the
mass spectrometer (Fig. 21.8).
An alternative to the ICAT labeling of proteins
that is not selective for cysteine-containing peptides
is to label the peptides after digestion (Tao & Aebersold
2003, Goshe & Smith 2003, Sechi & Oda 2003).
When trypsin cleaves a protein and generates a peptide with a new C terminus, it introduces an oxygen
atom derived from a molecule of water into the
carboxyl group of the peptide. This can be used to
differentially label peptides derived from alternative

(b) Predigestion in vitro labeling

(c) Postdigestion in vitro labeling

State 1

State 2

State 1

State 2

State 1

State 2

Label

Label

Extract
Fractionate

Extract
Fractionate

Extract
Fractionate

Extract
Fractionate

Label

Label

Digest

Digest

Mix

Extract/fractionate

Mix

Digest

Digest

Label
Enrich for
Cys-peptides

Label
Mix

Relative quantitation from mass spectra

Fig. 21.7 Overview of MS-based strategies for quantitative proteomics. Depending on the point at which the label is introduced,
most procedures are classified as (a) in vivo labeling, (b) predigestion labeling in vitro, or (c) postdigestion labeling in vitro. Reprinted
from Sechi & Oda (2003) Quantitative proteomics using mass spectrometry. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 7, 70–7. © 2003
with permission from Elsevier.

435

Proteomics I – Expression analysis and characterization of proteins

100
Quantification

Mixture 1 (light)

Light

Heavy

0
Labeled
cysteines

Combine and
proteolyze

Mixture 2 (heavy)

MS
analysis

550 560 570 580
m/z
Identification (MS/MS)

Affinity
separation

100
NH2-EACDPLR–COOH

0
200 400 600 800
m/z

Fig. 21.8 The ICAT reagent strategy for protein quantitation. Two protein mixtures representing two different cell states are
treated with the isotopically light (gray) or heavy (purple) ICAT reagents, respectively. The labeled protein mixtures are then
combined and proteolyzed; tagged peptides are selectively isolated and analyzed by MS. The relative abundance is determined by
the ratio of signal intensities of the tagged peptide pairs. Reprinted from Tao and Aebersold (2003) Advances in quantitative
proteomics via stable isotope tagging and mass spectrometry. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 14, 110–18. © 2003 with
permission from Elsevier.

protein samples if normal water is used in one buffer
and water substituted with heavy oxygen (18O) is
used in the other (Fig. 21.9). The abundance of
the peptides can then be compared, since they will
appear as doublets separated by two mass units.
In another group of methods, cells treated under
different conditions are grown in media containing
either normal or heavy isotopes of nitrogen, carbon,
or hydrogen. A useful approach is the use of labeled
amino acids (stable-isotope labeling with amino
acids in cell culture, SILAC) (Washburn et al. 2001).
The cells can then be harvested, combined, and the
proteins extracted for separation, tryptic digestion,
and analysis by mass spectrometry. Equivalent peptides from each sample will differ in mass by a single
mass unit and can easily be identified as doublets
in mass spectra. The relative amounts of the two
peptides can be determined on the basis of the
relative heights of the two peaks. The advantage of
this metabolic labeling approach is that the label is
introduced early in the experiment, therefore eliminating variation arising from sample preparation and
purification losses (Fig. 21.10). However, it can only
be used for the analysis of live cells that can be maintained in a controlled environment. It is not useful,
for example, for tissue explants, biopsies, body fluids,
or cells that are difficult to maintain in culture.
A final strategy involves the use of mass-coded
chemical tags, which avoids the need for stable iso-

topes. In the MCAT (mass-coded abundance tag)
method, proteins from one sample are labeled with
O-methylisourea and those from the other sample
are not labeled at all. This differs from the other
methods discussed above where both samples are
labeled but with different isotopes. This method is
simple and inexpensive, but less accurate than those
involving isotopes.
Protein modifications can also be detected by
mass spectrometry
Almost all proteins are modified in some way during
or after synthesis, either by cleavage of the polypeptide backbone or chemical modification of specific
amino acid side chains. This phenomenon, which is
known as post-translational modification (PTM),
provides a direct mechanism for the regulation of
protein activity and greatly enhances the structural
diversity and functionality of proteins by providing
a larger repertoire of chemical properties than is
possible using the 20 standard amino acids specified
by the genetic code. Several hundred different forms
of chemical modification have been documented,
but here we focus on phosphorylation, a reversible
form of modification which occurs in all cells (Yan
et al. 1998).
As discussed above, MALDI-TOF MS is most often
used to analyze intact peptides, and correlative

436

CHAPTER 21

Control

Experimental
Control

Experimental

Cells grown using
H/12C/14N-coded amino acids
14
or N-minimal medium

Cells grown using
H/13C/15N-coded amino acid
15
or N-enriched medium

1

2

Harvest cells
Denature and reduce
Combine
Cell lysis
Proteolysis
using H218O

Proteolysis
using H216O

Combine
Denature and reduce
(optional S-alkylation)
Proteolysis
16

O/18O-coded
peptide mixture

µLC-MS

Fig. 21.9 Enzymatic stable isotope coding. For enzymatic
labeling, proteins from two distinct proteomes are
proteolytically digested in aqueous buffer containing either
normal water (H216O; white squares) or isotopically labeled
water (H218O; purple squares). This encoding strategy
effectively labels every C terminus produced during digestion.
The samples are combined at the peptide level and then
analyzed by microcapillary LC-MS. Reprinted from Goshe and
Smith (2003) Stable isotope-coded proteomic mass
spectrometry. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 14, 101–9. ©
2003 with permission from Elsevier.

database searching (peptide mass fingerprinting)
allows the derived masses to be matched against the
theoretical peptides of known proteins. Therefore,
if the identity of the protein is known or can be
deduced from the peptide masses, phosphopeptides
can be identified simply by examining the mass
spectrum for mass shifts of 80 (the mass of PO3)
compared to predicted masses. Parallel analysis in
which the sample has been treated with alkaline
phosphatase can also be helpful, since peaks corresponding to phosphopeptides in the untreated sample
should be absent from the treated sample (Fig. 21.11).
The analysis of fragment ions serves two purposes
in phosphoproteomics. First, phosphopeptides preferentially yield diagnostic, phosphate-specific fragment ions such as H2PO4−, PO3− and PO2−, which have
masses of approximately 97, 79, and 63 respectively. Phosphoserine and phosphothreonine are

Isotope-coded
peptide mixture

µLC-MS

Fig. 21.10 Metabolic stable isotope coding. For metabolic
labeling, cells from two distinct cultures are grown on media
supplemented with either normal amino acids (1H/12C/14N)
or 14N-minimal media (white spheres) or stable isotope amino
acids (2H/13C/15N) or 15N-enriched media (purple spheres).
These mass tags are incorporated into proteins during
translation, thus providing complete proteome coverage.
An equivalent number of cells for each sample is combined
and processed for microcapillary LC-MS analysis. Reprinted
from Goshe and Smith (2003) Stable isotope-coded proteomic
mass spectrometry. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 14,
101–9. © 2003 with permission from Elsevier.

more labile in this respect than phosphotyrosine.
The presence of such ions in a mass spectrum therefore indicates the presence of a phosphopeptide in the
sample. Secondly, fragmentation along the polypeptide backbone can yield peptide fragments that
allow a sequence to be built up de novo. This sequence
will include the phosphoamino acid, providing a
definitive location for the phosphorylated residue.
Since the phosphate group provides a negative
charge, phosphate-specific fragment ions are usually
obtained by MS/MS using an ESI ion source in negative ion mode. Collision-induced dissociation (CID)
is used to generate the fragments and analysis is
usually carried out using a triple quadrupole or
more sensitive hybrid quadrupole-quadrupole-TOF
machine (an ion trap can also be used, although this
is less common because the instrumentation is not

437

Proteomics I – Expression analysis and characterization of proteins

Intensity

(a)

Before phosphatase
treatment
80 Da

Q1

Q2

Q3

SCAN

RF

RF

80 Da

(b)
Intensity

After phosphatase
treatment

Fig. 21.12 Detection of phosphopeptides using in-source
CID in a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. Excess energy
used during ionization causes fragmentation to occur at the
ion source. The ion stream is scanned in Q1 for phosphate
reporter ions such as PO3− (m/z = 79). These pass through the
other quadrupoles (running in RF mode) to the detector.

m/z

Fig. 21.11 Phosphopeptide identification by MALDI-TOF
MS mapping combined with alkaline phosphatase treatment.
(a) The MALDI-TOF MS spectrum of a proteolytic digest.
Phosphopeptides are indicated by peaks shifted by multiples
of 80 Da (HPO3 = 80 Da) relative to predicted
unphosphorylated peptide masses. (b) The disappearance
of such peaks upon treatment with a phosphatase confirms
their identity as phosphopeptides. Reprinted from McLachlin
and Chait (2001) Analysis of phosphorylated proteins and
peptides by mass spectrometry. Current Opinion in Chemical
Biology 5, 591–602. © 2001 with permission from Elsevier.

widely available). Three general strategies are used.
The first is called in-source CID and requires excess
energy during ionization to induce multiple collisions and produce the phosphate reporter ions in the
emerging ion stream (Fig. 21.12). This method also
fragments the peptide backbone to a lesser extent
and can therefore provide some peptide sequence
information (see below). Normal ionization energy
levels are used in precursor ion scanning. In this
mode, the first quadrupole (Q1) is used to scan the ion
stream, CID occurs in Q2 (running in RF mode), and
the third analyzer (Q3 or TOF) is set to detect phosphate reporter ions, such as PO3−, induced by collision. Phosphopeptides are thus identified when a
precursor ion scanned in Q1 yields a phosphate fragment that is detected in Q3 (Fig. 21.13). In neutral
loss scan mode, both Q1 and Q3 are set to scan the ion
stream. Q1 scans the full mass range, Q2 is used as the
collision cell, and Q3 scans a parallel range to Q1 but
at an m/z ratio that is 98/z lower, with the intention
of detecting the neutral loss of H3PO4 (Fig. 21.14).
All these methods can be combined with in-line
HPLC, either using reversed-phase material alone
or in combination with a second-dimension separation matrix, such as a strong cation exchange resin.
A good example of this approach was reported by
Ficarro et al. (2002). They digested yeast protein
lysates with trypsin, converted the peptides into

Q1

Q2

Q3

FIXED (79−)

SCAN

Fig. 21.13 Detection of phosphopeptides using precursor
ion scan mode in a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer.
The entire ion stream is scanned in Q1, allowing selected
ions through to the collision chamber in Q2. The fragmented
ions then pass through Q3, which is fixed to detect phosphate
reporter ions such as PO3− (m/z = 79). Only if intact
phosphopeptide ions pass through Q1 will reporter
ions pass through Q3 to the detector.

Q1

SCAN x

Q2

Q3

SCAN x-98

Fig. 21.14 Detection of phosphopeptides using neutral
loss scan mode in a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer.
The entire ion stream is scanned in Q1, allowing selected
ions (x) through to the collision chamber in Q2. Q3 is set to
scan the fragmented ions in parallel to Q1, but at a lower
mass range (e.g. x-98, where 98 is the mass of H3PO4). Only
phosphopeptide ions which lose H3PO4 during CID will pass
through Q3 to the detector.

methyl esters and enriched the phosphopeptide pool
using IMAC. This was coupled to a nanoflow HPLC
column that fed fractions directly into an ESI-mass
spectrometer. Over 1000 phosphopeptides were
identified in this procedure, and the sequences of
216 peptides were obtained allowing 383 phosphorylation sites to be determined.

438

CHAPTER 21

Protein microarrays can also be used for
expression analysis
2D-electrophoresis is an open system for proteome
analysis, rather like direct sequence sampling is an
open system for transcriptome analysis (p. 410). The
advantage of an open system is that potentially all
proteins can be detected, but the disadvantage is
that they also have to be characterized, which relies
on downstream annotation by mass spectrometry
(similarly, directly sampled cDNAs have to be characterized by downstream sequencing). DNA arrays
are closed systems in transcriptome analysis, i.e.
the data obtained are constrained by the number
and nature of sequences immobilized on the array.
However, it is not necessary to characterize any
of the features on the array by sequencing because
the sequences are already known. Similarly, protein
arrays are emerging as a useful closed system for
proteome analysis. These are miniature devices in
which proteins, or molecules that recognize proteins,
are arrayed on the surface (Templin et al. 2002,
Schweitzer & Kingsmore 2002, Cutler 2003, Zhu &
Snyder 2003).
In concept, protein arrays are no different to
DNA arrays, but they suffer from several practical
limitations. First, the manufacture of DNA arrays
is simplified by the availability of methods, such as
the polymerase chain reaction, for amplifying any
nucleic acid sequence. No amplification procedure
exists for proteins. Second, all DNA sequences are
made of the same four nucleotides and hence behave
similarly in terms of their chemical properties. The
principles of molecular recognition (hybridization
between complementary base pairs) apply to all
sequences. For this reason, hybridization reactions
can be carried out in highly parallel formats using a
single complex probe. Conversely, proteins are made
of 22 amino acids specified by the genetic code plus
many others generated by post-translational modification, so they have diverse chemical properties.
For example, some proteins are soluble in water
while others are lipophilic. Recognition parameters
vary widely so the same reaction conditions could
never be used for all proteins. Third, the homogeneity of DNA molecules means that labels are incorporated evenly and labeling does not interfere with
hybridization. Binding to solid substrates such as
nylon and glass does not interfere with hybridization
either. However, the labeling of proteins is much
more variable and both labeling and attachment to a
substrate could interfere with protein binding, either

by affecting the way the protein folds or by blocking
the binding site. Despite these differences, protein
arrays have been manufactured in many of the ways
discussed above for DNA arrays, including variations on standard contact printing (Mendoza et al.
1999, Lueking et al. 1999), inkjetting (Etkins 1998),
and photolithography (Mooney et al. 1996, Jones et
al. 1998). The concept of the protein array, protein
microarray, or protein chip covers a wide range of
different applications. Some of these are considered
below.
Antibody arrays contain immobilized
antibodies or antibody derivatives for the
capture of specific proteins
On these devices, antibodies are attached to the
array surface, so the protein array or chip can be
thought of as a miniaturized solid-state immunoassay. Antibodies interact with specific proteins and
are highly discriminatory, so they are suited to the
detailed analysis of protein profiles and expression
levels. The feasibility of this approach has been
demonstrated, for example, using a recombinant
Staphylococcal protein A covalently attached to a
gold surface. The recombinant protein A has five
immunoglobulin G binding domains, allowing antibodies to be attached by the Fc region, therefore
exposing the antigen-binding domain (Kanno et al.
2000). Antibody arrays have also been generated
by using banks of bacterial strains expressing recombinant antibody molecules (de Wildt et al. 2000).
There are three different formats for this type of
assay. The first is a standard immunoassay in which
the antibodies are immobilized and are used to capture labeled proteins from solution. Protein expression levels are quantified by measuring the signal
(usually fluorescent) which has been incorporated
into the proteins. A recent report (Haab et al. 2001)
describes the use of such an array comprising 115
different antibodies. Another groundbreaking aspect
of this report was that two protein samples, each
labeled with a different fluorophore, were exposed to
the array simultaneously, and differential protein
expression could be monitored. The second format is
a miniature sandwich assay, in which unlabeled
proteins are captured from solution and detected
with a second, labeled antibody. Although this format requires two antibodies recognizing distinct
epitopes for each protein, it is not necessary to label
the target population of proteins, a process that is
inefficient and variable. An example of this approach

Proteomics I – Expression analysis and characterization of proteins

for the detection of human cytokines is provided
by Moody et al. (2001). The third format involves a
tertiary detection system and therefore offers even
greater sensitivity. One example is the immunoRCA
technique, which involves rolling-circle amplification
(Schweitzer & Kingsmore 2002, Kingsmore & Patel
2003). The principle of this technique is that a
protein, captured by an immobilized antibody, is
recognized by a second antibody in a sandwich assay
as above, but the second antibody has an oligonucleotide covalently attached to it. In the presence of
a circular DNA template, DNA polymerase, and the
four dNTPs, rolling-circle amplification of the template occurs resulting in a long concatamer comprising hundreds of copies of the circle, which can be
detected using a fluorescent-labeled oligonucleotide
probe. Antibody arrays have been reviewed (Lal et al.
2002, Peluso et al. 2003).
Antigen arrays are used to measure antibodies
in solution
On these devices, protein antigens are attached to
the array surface. They are used for reverse immunoassays, i.e. detecting antibodies in solution (e.g. see
Paweletez et al. 2001, Joos et al. 2000). The antigens
may be proteins or other molecules such as peptides
or carbohydrates. Several reports have been published in which arrays of allergens have been used to
screen serum samples for IgE reactivity in allergic
responses and autoimmune diseases. In some cases
it has proven possible not only to confirm the
presence of such antibodies but also to carry out
quantitative analysis. More recently, antigen arrays
have been used to serodiagnose patients with viral
infections.
General protein arrays can be used for
expression profiling and functional analysis
This type of device can contain any type of protein,
and is used to assay protein–protein interactions and
protein interactions with other molecules. A range of
detection strategies may be used, including labeling
of the interacting molecules, or label-independent
methods such as surface plasmon resonance. For
example, Ge et al. (2000) developed a system for
studying molecular interactions using a universal
protein array (UPA) system where protein samples
are transferred from 96-well microtiter plates to
nylon membranes. The technology has also been
applied to the arraying of cDNA expression libraries,

439

such that screening can be carried out not only
with nucleic acid probes but also with antibodies or
other ligands directed at the recombinant proteins
(Bussow et al. 1998). One of the most impressive
demonstrations of the power of protein array technology was provided by MacBeath & Schreiber
(2000). They used an array of proteins on a glass
slide to screen for ligands, enzyme substrates, and
protein–protein interactions. Functional assays can
also be carried out on such arrays. For example, Zhu
et al. (2000) produced an array containing nearly
all the protein kinases of the yeast proteome and
carried out kinase assays on 17 different substrates.
More notably, the same group has also produced a
glass microarray containing nearly all the proteins
in the yeast proteome (5800 spots) and used this to
screen for various functions such as phospholipid
binding and interactions with calmodulin (Zhu et al.
2001).
Other molecules may be arrayed instead
of proteins
These are not protein arrays in the strict sense
because they do not consist of arrayed proteins.
However, they are considered here because they
are analogous to antibody arrays, i.e. they contain
specific capture agents that interact with proteins.
DNA arrays fall within this class if they are used to
analyze DNA–protein interactions (see for example
Bulyk et al. 2001 and Iyer et al. 2001). Aptamers,
single-stranded nucleotides that interact specifically
with proteins, could also be used in this manner (see
review by Mirzabekov & Kolchinsky 2001). Another
area of active current research is the development of
chips containing artificial recognition sites for proteins. The concept of molecularly imprinted polymers
(MIPs) depends on the ability to emboss a polymeric
substrate with recognizable molecular imprints that
mimic the actual recognition molecules. For example, Shi et al. (1999) have described a procedure for
coating recognition molecules in sugar, which is
then overlain by a hexafluoropropylene polymer.
They coated a mica surface with streptavidin and
then covered it with a disaccharide which molded
the shape of the protein. After applying the polymer,
the protein and mica were removed leaving a
streptavidin MIP. This was subsequently shown
to preferentially bind biotin. It is not yet clear
whether this technology has the sensitivity or
specificity to be applied to proteome-wide expression
analysis.

440

CHAPTER 21

Some biochips bind to particular classes
of protein
Instead of specific molecular interactions, these
devices use broad-specificity capture agents. As
above, they can be termed protein chips but not
protein arrays. For example, Ciphergen Biosystems
Inc. market a range of ProteinChips with various
surface chemistries to bind different classes of proteins. Although relatively non-specific compared to
antibodies, complex mixtures of proteins can be simplified and then analyzed by mass spectrometry. An
advantageous feature of this system is the ease with
which it is integrated with downstream MS analysis,
since the ProteinChip itself doubles as a modified
MALDI plate (Fung et al. 2001, Weinberger et al.
2001). After the chip has been washed to remove
unbound proteins, it is coated with a matrix solution
and analyzed by time-of-flight MS. This allows
surface-enhanced laser desorption and ionization
(SELDI), which provides more uniform mass spectra
than MALDI and allows protein quantification.
Other protein chip platforms use surface plasmon
resonance to detect and quantify protein binding.
This involves measuring changes in the refractive
index of the chip surface caused by increases in mass
(Malmqvist & Karlsson 1997). Protein chips produced by the US company BIAcore are based on this
concept, and other chips combine surface plasmon
resonance measurements with mass spectrometry
(Nelson et al. 2000).
Solution arrays are non-planar microarrays
Recent developments in microfluidic devices indicate
that the next generation of miniature protein assay
platforms may be solution arrays. These could
provide increased sensitivity (due to the kinetics of
binding in solution) and higher throughput (because
the arrays are constructed in three dimensions).

Examples include flow-through chips containing
microchannels (Cheek et al. 2001), an array system
based on beads labeled with different concentrations
of fluorescent dyes (Morgan et al. 2004, Edwards
et al. 2004), a system based on fiber optics (Gunderson
et al. 2004), and bar-coded nanoparticles (reviewed
by Zhou et al. 2001, Venkatasubbarao 2004).

Suggested reading
Aebersold R. & Mann M. (2003) Mass spectrometrybased proteomics. Nature 422, 198–207.
Cutler P. (2003) Protein arrays: The current state-ofthe-art. Proteomics 3, 3–18.
Lee W.C. & Lee K.H. (2004) Applications of affinity
chromatography in proteomics. Analytical Biochemistry 324, 1–10.
Lesney M.S. (2001) Pathways to the proteome: from
2DE to HPLC. Modern Drug Discovery, 33–9.
Lilley K.S., Razzaq A. & Dupree P. (2001) Twodimensional gel electrophoresis: recent advances
in sample preparation, detection and quantitation.
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 6, 46–50.
Link A.J. (2002) Multidimensional peptide separations
in proteomics. Trends in Biotechnology 20, S8–S13.
Mann M., Hendrickson R.C. & Pandey A. (2001) Analysis of proteins and proteomes by mass spectrometry. Annual Review of Biochemistry 70, 437–73.
Mann M. & Jensen O.N. (2003) Proteomic analysis of
post-translational modifications. Nature Biotechnology
21, 255–61.
Nagele E., Vollmer M., Horth P. & Vad C. (2004) 2DLC/MS techniques for the identification of proteins in
highly complex mixtures. Expert Review Proteomics
1, 37–46.
Sechi S. & Oda Y. (2003) Quantitative proteomics using
mass spectrometry. Current Opinion in Chemical
Biology 7, 70–7.
Wang H. & Hanash S. (2003) Multi-dimensional liquid
phase-based separations in proteomics. Journal of
Chromatography B 787, 11–18.
Zhu H. & Snyder M. (2003) Protein chip technology.
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 7, 55–63.

CHAPTER 22
Proteomics II – Analysis of protein structures

Introduction
In Chapter 9, we discussed the principles of sequence
analysis and showed how, under certain circumstances, the function of a new gene could be assigned
by comparison with genes with similar sequences
whose functions have already been determined.
Although not a foolproof method for functional
annotation, this strategy has been successful in the
functional classification of 30–40% of the genes discovered in the genome projects. In the Saccharomyces
Genome Project, for example, 30% of the identified
genes had already been characterized by individual
experiments, 30% were given tentative functions by
sequence analysis alone, while another 30% were
anonymous in that they lacked any form of functional annotation. The remaining 10% were questionable open reading frames (ORFs).
One way in which functions can be assigned to
anonymous genes (also known as orphans or ORFans
because they do not belong to any known gene family) is to express them in bacteria, purify the encoded
protein, and examine its structure. The product of
an orphan gene is known as a hypothetical protein,
because in most cases the protein itself has not been
isolated from its natural source and studied directly.
By comparing the structure of hypothetical proteins
to previously solved protein structures, tentative
functions can often be assigned. This is because
three-dimensional protein structures are much more
strongly conserved in evolutionary terms than
primary amino acid sequences, and it is the threedimensional protein structure (rather than the
primary sequence) which actually carries out the
biochemical function of the molecule. The determination of protein structure was once regarded as the
ultimate stage in any biological study. Such analysis
would only be undertaken when there was a clear
and thorough understanding of the protein’s function, and the desire was to understand the functional
implications of its structure and interactions at the

atomic level. Structural proteomics has turned this
idea on its head. The aim of structural proteomics
is to express large numbers of genes (including as
many orphan genes as possible) and compare the
three-dimensional structures of the resulting proteins revealing distant evolutionary relationships
between orphan genes and those whose functions
are known. This brings the determination of protein
structure to the beginning of the investigative process (Norin & Sundstrom 2002, Aloy et al. 2002, Sali
et al. 2003).
Sequence analysis alone is not sufficient to
annotate all orphan genes
As the sequencing phase of each genome project
nears completion, potentially all the protein-coding
sequences in the organism become available. The
quickest way to assign a probable function to a new
gene or cDNA is to carry out pairwise comparisons to
all other sequences existing in databases using alignment tools such as BLAST (Altschul et al. 1990) or
FASTA (Pearson & Lipman 1996) (see Chapter 9).
Conserved sequence often indicates conserved function, so if cDNA X is very similar in sequence to cDNA
Y, and cDNA Y encodes a protein phosphatase,
then it is likely that cDNA X also encodes a protein
phosphatase. Although such analysis cannot usually reveal the precise role of a gene in a cellular
or whole-organism context, it can often reveal a
biochemical function. Further experiments would
be necessary for a more in-depth functional understanding e.g. by determining the gene’s expression
pattern and mutant phenotype. Even so, the knowledge that the gene product is a phosphatase would
help in developing experimental strategies to investigate its function more thoroughly.
Powerful though tools such as BLAST and FASTA
are, they are only really useful when there is >30%
sequence identity between the query sequence and
entries in the sequence databases. As the evolutionary

442

CHAPTER 22

relationship between sequences becomes more distant, pairwise comparisons tend to become less
reliable. Thus, where there is 20–30% identity, over
half of all evolutionary relationships fail to be
detected by these standard alignment tools (Brenner
et al. 1998, Murzin 1998). One way to address this
problem is to carry out multiple sequence comparisons, which use the characteristics of sets of related
sequences as a search query. PSI-BLAST (Altschul
et al. 1997; p. 173) is an algorithm that generates
profiles of multiple sequences as a search query and
can find three times as many homologs as a standard
BLAST search (Park et al. 1998, Martin 1998).
Multiple sequence alignments can also be useful,
identifying patterns and motifs that are conserved
over great evolutionary distances. Such alignments
are collected in secondary sequence databases such
as BLOCKS and PRINTS (p. 162). As the power of
these strategies increases, however, it becomes more
important to screen matches for false positives,
which can be generated by low-complexity regions
representing common protein structures. For example, amino acid sequences corresponding to transmembrane helices and coiled-coil domains are so
common that they are found in many unrelated
proteins (Huynen et al. 1998). Another potential
downfall is pollution in sequence databases. It is
known that all databases contain a small but significant proportion of errors, so even a confident hit
generated by an anonymous gene or cDNA can be
misleading. It is worthwhile considering the fact
that annotating a new gene solely on the basis of
someone else’s annotation of an existing gene can
propagate and reinforce any errors that have been
made (Bork & Bairoch 1996, Zhang & Smith 1997,
Brenner 1999).
Protein structures are more highly conserved
than sequences
Sequence comparison is a very powerful method for
functional annotation, but even with sophisticated
multiple alignment tools, fewer than 50% of newly
discovered genes can be matched to previously
identified genes with known functions. Although the
success rate is likely to improve as more information
accumulates in the databases, it is still a significant
bottleneck to functional annotation. For example, it
was shown that even two years after the complete
genome sequence of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
became available, the number of orphan ORFs had
not been significantly reduced (Fischer & Eisenberg

1999). This is despite the massive increase in available sequence data from other organisms over the
same time period, and suggests that a substantial
number of gene families exist with no associated
functional information in any of the sequenced
genomes (Jones 2000). It is here that the determination of three-dimensional protein structure can help.
Structure is much more strongly conserved than
sequence because of degeneracy, a concept that is
most often applied to nucleotide sequences but is also
relevant to protein structures. In the genetic code,
most amino acids are specified by more than one
codon, and in some cases up to six codons are used.
Therefore, a certain amount of divergence in a
nucleotide sequence can occur without altering the
primary amino acid sequence of a protein (Fig. 22.1).
In the same way, chemically similar amino acids such
as leucine, isoleucine, and valine can be regarded as
conserved residues rather than mismatches when
comparing protein sequences, because they would
be expected to influence the folding of the polypeptide backbone in a similar manner. This is why protein sequences are often compared using similarity
scores rather than identity scores, because similarity
scores take into account the significance of different
substitutions (p. 163). However, the level of degeneracy tolerated in terms of converting a primary
amino acid sequence into a three-dimensional structure is much greater than this. Indeed, only a small
number of residues in a globular protein are actually
associated with protein function, and these may
vary in their position within a sequence as long as
their spatial arrangement is conserved (Kassua &
Thornton 1999). Thus, even sequences with very

(a)

CUU

ACC

A GU

CGG

CCC

GCG

(b)

U UG

A CU

UC A

AGA

C CG

GC U

(c)

L EU

THR

SER

A RG

P RO

ALA

(d)

AUC

U CG

ACA

AAA

GU A

GU U

(e)

I LE

SER

THR

LYS

VAL

VAL

Fig. 22.1 Degeneracy in nucleotide and amino acid
sequences. Up to six codons may specify the same amino acid,
with the result that nucleotide sequences (a) and (b), which
are conserved at only eight out of a possible 18 positions,
specify exactly the same peptide (c). Nucleotide sequence (d),
which matches sequence (a) at only four positions, encodes a
different peptide (e), but one in which the amino acids at each
position have very similar chemical properties to those in (c).
These two peptides would be likely to fold in similar ways.

443

Proteomics II – Analysis of protein structures

(a)

1

V L S P A D K T N V K A A WG K V G A H A G E Y G A E A L E R M F L S F P T T K T Y F P H F – – – –

46

1

G L S D G E WQ L V L N V WG K V E A D I P G H G Q E V L I R L F K G H P E T L E K F D K F K H L K

50

47

– – D L S H G S A Q V K G H G K K V A D A L T N A V A H V D DM P N A L S A L S D L H A H K L R V D

94

51

S E D E MK A S E D L K K HG A T V L T A L GG I L K K K GH H E A E I K P L A Q S H A T K H K I –

99

95

P VNF – K L L S HC L L V T L A AH L P A E F T P A VHA S L DK F L A S V S T V L T S K Y R

141

100

P V K Y L E F I S E C I I Q V L Q S K H P G D F G A D A Q G A MN K A L E L F R K DM A S N Y K E L G F Q G

153

(b)
80

20

60

60

20

80

30
70

40

120

110
10

10
90

1

80

40

110 30
70
130

90

153
80

140

150

1

141

Fig. 22.2 (a) Alignment of human α-globin and human myoglobin using the EBI EMBOSS-Align program
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/emboss/align/). Note the sequences are very different (26% identity, 39% similarity).
(b) Despite divergence at the sequence level, the three-dimensional structures are remarkably conserved.

few conserved residues can generate similar structures (Finkelstein & Ptytsin 1987). It has been estimated that 20–30% of orphan genes could be
annotated immediately by determining the structures of the encoded proteins and comparing these to
known structures (Bork & Koonin 1998, Blundell &
Mizuguchi 2000).
A hypothetical example of the power of structural
proteomics was discussed by Shapiro & Harris (2000)
using the proteins hemoglobin and myoglobin. The
solved structures of these proteins are very similar,
reflecting the fact that they are both oxygen carriers
(Aronson et al. 1994) (Fig. 22.2). However, the
sequences are so divergent that a BLAST search with
myoglobin would not elicit a hit on α- or β-globulin,
the components of hemoglobin (Fig. 22.2). If the
myoglobin sequence were to be obtained for the
first time as part of a genome project, how would it
be annotated? Sequence comparison might not be
appropriate, but structural comparison would clearly

show similarities to hemoglobin, allowing myoglobin
to be classified as an oxygen carrier.
Conserved protein structure may imply conserved function but how strong is the likelihood?
The frequency with which similar structure corresponds to similar function has been calculated by
Koppensteiener et al. (2000). These investigators
compared the structures and functions of a large
number of protein folds and found correlation
between structure and function in 66% of cases. This
means that, if a hypothetical protein is structurally
similar to a characterized protein, there is a 66%
chance that the functions are also related. On the
other hand, there is a 33% chance that they are not,
and the relationship in structure is coincidental.
This is partly due to the fact that a number of protein
folds are known to serve a variety of functions. These
common structures are known as superfolds (Orengo
et al. 1994). For example, the TIM barrel, which
consists of eight α-helices and eight β-sheets, is

444

CHAPTER 22

associated with no fewer than 16 different functions
(Hegyi & Gernstein 1999). It is found in the majority
of enzymes, and if this structure is revealed in a hypothetical protein, it is generally of no practical help in
functional annotation.

Structural proteomics has required
developments in structural analysis
techniques and bioinformatics
Techniques for solving protein structures are notoriously slow and laborious. In order to bring structural
biology into the genomics era, it has been necessary
to develop novel high-throughput methods and
marry these to bioinformatic procedures for structural analysis and comparison. The last few years
have seen advances in the two principal techniques
for structural determination – X-ray crystallography

and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, as
well as improvements in computer algorithms for
structure–structure matching, structure prediction,
and model building. At the same time, standard
classification schemes for protein structures and
databases of structural classification have also been
developed.
Protein structures are determined
experimentally by X-ray crystallography or
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
The most direct way to determine the threedimensional structure of a hypothetical protein is
to solve it using atomic resolution techniques, the
principal methods being X-ray crystallography and
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
(Box 22.1). However, both these procedures are notoriously slow, involving many laborious preparative

Box 22.1 Methods for solving protein structures
X-ray crystallography
The basis of X-ray crystallography is the ability
of a precisely orientated protein crystal to
scatter incident X-rays onto a detector in a
predictable manner. The scattered X-rays can
positively or negatively interfere with each
other, generating signals called reflections
(see Fig. B22.1). The nature of the scattering
depends on the number of electrons in an
atom, and electron density maps can thus be
reconstructed using a mathematical function
called the Fourier transform. The more data
used in the Fourier transform, the greater the
resolution of the technique, and the more
accurate the resulting structural model.
Structural determination depends on both the
amplitude and phase of the scattering, but
only the amplitude can be calculated from the
intensities of the diffraction pattern. For a long
time, the only way in which this phase
problem could be addressed and
macromolecular structures completely solved
was multiple isomorphous replacement, i.e. the
use of heavy atom derivatives of the protein
crystal. The incorporation of heavy atoms into
a protein crystal by soaking alters the
diffraction intensity allowing the phase to be
calculated.

More recently, the laborious process of
finding heavy atom derivatives has been
superceded by techniques such as
multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD).
MAD takes advantage of the presence of
anomalously scattering atoms in the protein
structure. The magnitude of anomalous
scattering varies with the wavelength of the

Fig. B22.1 X-ray diffraction image of a protein
phosphatase. (Courtesy of Daniela Stock, MRC Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, Cambridge.)

445

Proteomics II – Analysis of protein structures

Box 22.1

continued

incident X-rays, and thus requires precisely
tuneable incident X-radiation, which can be
found only at synchrotron radiation sources.
Isomorphous crystals can be produced rapidly
by incorporating the amino acid derivative
selenomethionine into the expressed protein
(Hendrickson et al. 1990). Anomalous
diffraction data collected at several
wavelengths can then be used to determine
both the phase and amplitude of the
scattering, allowing high-throughput
determination of protein structures. Recently,
it has been reported that under optimal
conditions a protein crystal structure can be
solved using MAD analysis in about 30 min
(Walsh et al. 1999).

decays depends on the structure and spatial
configuration of the molecule. For example,
the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) results
from the transfer of magnetic energy through
space if interacting nuclei are < 0.5 nm apart.
NOE spectroscopy (NOESY) shows proximal
atoms as symmetrical peaks superimposed
over the typical NMR spectrum. In this way,
the analysis of NMR spectra can determine the
three-dimensional spatial arrangement of
atoms, and can allow a set of distance
constraints to be built up to determine protein
structure. The technique is generally applicable
only to small proteins (< 25 kDa) although
recent innovations have stretched this
limitation to about 100 kDa (see main text).

Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy

Circular dichroism spectroscopy

NMR spectroscopy is used to determine the
structure of proteins in solution. The basis of
NMR is that some atoms, including natural
isotopes of nitrogen, phosphorus and
hydrogen, are intrinsically magnetic and can
switch between magnetic spin states in an
applied magnetic field. This is achieved by
the absorbance of electromagnetic radiation,
generating magnetic resonance spectra (see
Fig. B22.2). While the resonance frequency for
different atoms is unique, it is also influenced
by the surrounding electron density. This
means that magnetic resonance frequency is
shifted in the context of different chemical
groups (a so-called chemical shift) allowing the
discrimination between e.g. methyl and
aromatic groups. The manner in which NMR

Circular dichroism (CD) describes the optical
activity of asymmetric molecules as shown
by their differing absorption spectra in left
and right circularly polarized light. CD
spectrophotometry between 160 and
240 nm allows the characterization of protein
secondary structure, because a-helices and
b-sheets generate distinct spectra. With the
recent application of synchrotron radiation
CD (SRCD) to protein structural studies,
this technique has emerged as a useful
complement to X-ray crystallography and
NMR spectroscopy for the analysis of protein
structure. The use of the technique in
structural genomics has been recently
reviewed (Wallace & Janes 2001).

Fig. B22.2 Typical appearance of
an NMR spectrum. This data can be built
into a series of structural models based on
atomic distance constraints.

170

140

110

80
PPM

50

20

446

CHAPTER 22

steps that have to be optimized for each protein analyzed. A second bottleneck is data acquisition, especially for X-ray crystallography, where synchrotron
radiation sources are required. A third bottleneck is
data processing, i.e. converting the X-ray diffraction
patterns and NMR spectra into structures that can
be submitted to the protein structural databases.
Recent advances in all these areas have made highthroughput structural determination a realistic
goal.
Both X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy
require milligram amounts of very pure protein. The
first challenge in structural genomics is therefore to
find suitable expression systems and purification
procedures which are widely applicable and produce
proteins that fold properly to achieve their native
state. Advantages of heterologous expression systems include the ease with which amino acid derivatives can be incorporated, as these are required for
procedures such as multi-wavelength anomalous
diffraction phasing (Box 22.1), and the ability to
include an affinity tag, which greatly simplifies
protein purification (reviewed by Stevens 2000a).
Otherwise, optimal chromatography procedures
must be established for every protein, a significant
bottleneck in sample preparation (Heinemann et al.
2001, Mittl & Grutter 2001). Various systems have
been tested, including E. coli, yeast, insect cells, and
cell-free systems (reviewed by Edwards et al. 2000).
E. coli has the advantage of low cost, which is an
important consideration in a large-scale structural
genomics program. However, eukaryotic systems
are advantageous where protein folding requires
chaperons and where post-translational modification is required to achieve the native structure.
Successful X-ray crystallography is dependent
on the production of high-quality protein crystals.
Defining conditions to achieve crystallization has
long been regarded as an art, and typically involves
the laborious trial-and-error testing of hundreds of
different conditions. A major recent breakthrough is
the development of robotic workstations that can
process hundreds of thousands of crystallization
experiments in parallel, allowing rapid determination of optimum crystallization conditions (Stevens
2000b, Terwilliger 2000, Mueller et al. 2001). Automated handling of crystals can maximize the use of
synchrotron radiation sources therefore increasing
the number of crystals that can be analyzed in a
particular session (Abola et al. 2000). The final
bottleneck in X-ray crystallography, that of data
processing and structure determination itself, is

being addressed with the development of powerful
new software packages (reviewed by Lamzin &
Perrakis 2000). NMR spectroscopy is carried out in
solution and is therefore suitable for the analysis of
proteins that are recalcitrant to crystallization. Until
recently, the technique was applicable only to proteins with a low molecular weight (<25 kDa) but a
number of advances in instrumentation have helped
to increase this threshold significantly (see review by
Riek et al. 2000). Following sample preparation, the
major bottlenecks in NMR structure determination
are data recording and analysis. Data acquisition is
becoming quicker with improvements in instrument
design, particularly novel probes (Medek et al. 2000)
and higher frequency magnets (Lin et al. 2000) leading to higher signal-to-noise ratios and greater resolution. Data analysis times, typically ranging from
weeks to months, are being cut down through the
use of integrated software packages for spectral
analysis and model building (e.g. Koradi et al. 1998,
Xu et al. 2001).
An important consideration is that increasing the
speed at which protein structures are solved should
not reduce the quality of the structures generated.
With this in mind, a number of computer programs
have been developed for structural validation and
checking the consistency of structural data, e.g.
PROCHECK (Laskowski et al. 1993) and SFCHECK
(Vaguine et al. 1999).
Protein structures can be modeled on
related structures
An alternative to solving protein structures directly
is to predict how a given amino acid sequence will
fold. If the sequence with unknown structure (the
target sequence) shows >25% identity to another
sequence whose structure is known (the template
sequence), then the structure of the target sequence
can be predicted by comparative modeling (also
called homology modeling). In this method, multiple
sequence alignment is carried out with the target
protein and one or more templates. Then a computer
program such as SWISS-PDBVIEWER is used to
align the target structurally on the template. For
closely related proteins this is an easy process, but for
distantly related proteins with some insertions and
deletions, it can be more difficult. The compact core
of the protein is always easier to model than the more
variable loops, and algorithms are sometimes used
that match the loops to databases of loops from other
proteins. This is called a “spare parts algorithm”.

Proteomics II – Analysis of protein structures

Where the level of sequence identity is too low for
comparative modeling, two broad classes of predictive methods can be used: those in which sequences
are compared to known structures to test “goodness
of fit” ( fold recognition methods) and those in which
structural information is derived directly from primary sequence data without reference to known
structures (ab initio prediction methods).
Fold recognition is also known as threading,
and can be defined as a technique that attempts to
determine whether the sequence of an uncharacterized protein is consistent with a known structure by
systematically matching its compatibility to a collection of known protein folds (Jones et al. 1992, Bryant
& Lawrence 1993). Recent algorithms such as
GenTHREADER (Jones 1999a) incorporate aspects
of both sequence profiling (as used in comparative
modeling) and threading, to increase the confidence
with which structures are assigned. Fold recognition
algorithms are “trained” on fold libraries, such as
those found in structural databases like Pfam and
BLOCKS (Chapter 9), to establish parameters of
recognition. This method is widely used to assign
tentative functions to the large sets of anonymous
cDNA sequences arising from genome projects (e.g.
Fischer & Eisenberg 1997, 1999; Rychlewski et al.
1998, 1999). Ab initio prediction of tertiary protein
structure is still a distant goal, and the algorithms
in current use are suitable only for the prediction of
secondary structures. However, secondary structure
prediction is achieved with reasonable accuracy.
For example, the PSIPRED method devised by Jones
(1999b) matches solved protein structures in more
than 75% of cases. For the prediction of tertiary
structures, a mini-threading algorithm (i.e. an ab initio
method incorporating fold data in the form of fragments from resolved protein structures) has been
used to predict the structure of NK-lysin successfully
(Jones 1997, reviewed in Jones 2000).
The usefulness of structural modeling depends on
the reliability with which the models can accurately
predict protein structures. This has been assessed by
rigorously comparing several thousand structural
predictions with actual solved structures, in a series
of critical assessment of structural prediction (CASP)
experiments (reviewed by Moult et al. 1999, Murzin
2001). Ab initio methods are the least reliable and
often fail to predict folds that are identified by fold
recognition methods. However, fold recognition is
limited by the accuracy with which the sequence
of the hypothetical protein can be aligned over that
of the template for comparison (reviewed by Moult

447

& Melamud 2000). Programs such as Dali (Holm &
Sander 1995) and VAST (Gibrat et al. 1996), can be
used for structural alignment, as recently reviewed
by Szustakowski & Weng (2000).
Protein structures can be aligned using
algorithms that carry out intramolecular
and intermolecular comparisons
Once the tertiary structure of a protein has been
determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy, or modeled by comparative modeling techniques, it is deposited in the PDB and can be accessed
by other researchers. As discussed at the beginning
of the chapter, the key benefit of structural data in
proteomics is the ability to compare protein structures and predict functions on the basis of conserved
structural features. There are two requirements to
fulfil this aim – an objective method for comparing
protein structures and a system of structural classification that can be applied to all proteins, so that
protein scientists in different parts of the world use
the same descriptive language.
Several programs are available, many of which
are free over the Internet, that convert PDB files into
three-dimensional models (e.g. Rasmol, MolScript,
Chime). Furthermore, a large number of algorithms
have been written to allow protein structures to be
compared. Generally, these work on one of two principles although some of the more recent programs
employ elements of both. The first method is intermolecular comparison, where the structures of two
proteins are superimposed and the algorithm attempts
to minimize the distance between superimposed
atoms (Fig. 22.3). The function used to measure the
similarity between structures is generally the root mean
square deviation (RMSD), which is the square root
of the average squared distance between equivalent
atoms. The RMSD decreases as protein structures
become more similar, and is zero if two identical
structures are superimposed. Examples of such algorithms include Comp-3D and ProSup. The second
method is intramolecular comparison, where the
structures of two proteins are compared side by side,
and the algorithm measures the internal distances
between equivalent atoms within each structure and
identifies alignments in which these internal distances
are most closely matched (Fig. 22.4). An example of
such an algorithm is Dali. Algorithms that employ
both methods include COMPARER and VAST.
Similar methods are used to gauge the accuracy
of structural models when the actual structures

448

CHAPTER 22

than 2–3Å even using completely automated methods. When the percentage identity drops below 40%
then getting a good alignment, often with manual
intervention, becomes more critical.
The annotation of proteins by structural
comparison has been greatly facilitated
by standard systems for the structural
classification of proteins

Fig. 22.3 Intermolecular comparison of protein structures,
with circles representing Cα atoms of each amino acid residue
and lines representing the path of the polypeptide backbone
in space. This process involves the superposition of protein
structures and the calculation of distances between
equivalent atoms in the superimposed structures (shown
as bi-directional arrows). These distances are used to
calculate the root mean square deviation (RMSD).

Fig. 22.4 Intramolecular comparison of protein structures,
with circles representing Cα atoms of each amino acid residue
and lines representing the path of the polypeptide backbone
in space. This process involves side-by-side analysis based on
comparative distances between equivalent atoms within each
structure (shown as color-coded dotted lines).

become available. When alignments are good, as is
generally the case with comparative modeling, then
very accurate models are possible. RMSDs of less
than 1.0Å represent very good predictions, since this
is similar to the degrees of difference between two
separate experimental determinations of the same
protein structure. When the percentage sequence
identity between template structures and target
sequence exceeds 70% it is reasonable to expect that
the model should be accurate to an RMSD of less

Functional annotation on the basis of protein structure requires a rigorous and standardized system for
the classification of different structures. One way to
do this would be to identify particular structural
features, which are known as folds, and group functional protein domains according to which folds are
present. This is not as easy as it sounds because there
may be a continuous range of intermediate structures between two particular fold types, especially
for those folds that appear in many proteins; this is
known as the Russian doll effect. It is estimated that
there are about 1000 superfamilies of protein folds
in total (Brenner et al. 1997, Zhang & DeLisi 1998,
Wolf et al. 2000b) although much higher numbers
have been suggested (e.g. see Swindells et al. 1998).
Existing classification schemes are generally hierarchical: at each level, proteins are classified according to the particular folds they possess, allowing new
proteins to be assigned to the appropriate category.
There are various different classification schemes based
on pairwise structural comparisons which involve
arbitrary thresholds of similarity. Consequently,
different schemes can place the same protein in different families or subfamilies according to these
cutoff levels. In one study, three structural classification schemes were compared (Hadley & Jones
1999). These are Structural Classification of Proteins
(SCOP; Murzin et al. 1995), Class, Architecture,
Topology and Homologous super-family (CATH;
Orengo et al. 1997), and Fold classification based on
Structure-Structure alignment of Proteins (FSSP;
Holm & Sander 1996). SCOP is a manual classification scheme using a number of parameters,
including human knowledge of evolutionary relationships. In contrast, CATH and FSSP are automatic
systems relying entirely on sequence comparisons
and geometric criteria. CATH is semi-automatic,
with comparisons carried out using the SSAP algorithm, but the results of comparisons are manually
curated. FSSP is fully automated, with structural
comparisons carried out using the Dali algorithm.
Perhaps because of these differences, only about

Proteomics II – Analysis of protein structures

449

All proteins

Fig. 22.5 The CATH (Class,
Architecture, Topology, Homologous
superfamily) hierarchical protein
structure classification scheme. This
example classification is featured on
the CATH homepage (http://www.
biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/cath/lex/
cathinfo.html), and shows the single
domain hemopexin protein 1hxn
(Baker et al. 1993). In CATH this
protein is classified as C (mainly β) A
(propeller) T (hemopexin) H (1hxn).
Note that the classification system
can branch further after level H.

C

A

Alpha

Ribbon

Beta

Sheet

Alpha-beta

Roll Propeller

T

Hemopexin

H

1hxn

60% of the proteins investigated showed the same
results with all three classification schemes. Over
one-third were placed in different groupings by the
three schemes (Hadley & Jones 1999). An example
CATH classification is shown in Fig. 22.5.
Tentative functions can be assigned based on
crude structural features
Where sequence and structural comparisons both
fail to provide functional information, structural
analysis can often reveal functional characteristics
of proteins at a simpler level. For example, scanning
the surface of a protein can reveal clefts that are
likely to represent ligand-binding sites (Laskowski
et al. 1996) or domains that probably interact with
other proteins ( Jones & Thornton 1995, 1997). This
allows the low-resolution classification of proteins,
e.g. a protein with a large cleft could be tentatively
assigned the designation of “enzyme”. Higher resolution characterization may be possible by matching
the shape of the cleft to a library of small molecular
shapes. This can be achieved with the help of drug
design software such as DOCK (Briem & Kuntz 1996)
and HOOK (Eisen et al. 1994), which match potential ligands to binding sites on the protein surface. A
number of methods have been published recently
that allow the prediction of active sites in enzymes
based on the spatial distribution of critical residues in
different fold families (Wallace et al. 1997, Russell
et al. 1998). These classifications are not based on
homology, since there is no evidence of an evolutionary relationship. The possession of common structural features between two proteins in the absence
of a proven evolutionary relationship is known as
analogy.

International structural proteomics
initiatives have been established to solve
protein structures on a large scale
Structural proteomics initiatives have been set up
all over the world, some comprising dispersed laboratories working towards a common goal and some
focused at particular centralized sites (Stevens et al.
2001, Zhang and Kim 2003). In America, the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS)
has funded nine structural proteomics pilot centers
(Terwilliger 2000), and several academic and industrial consortia have been established in America,
Europe, and Japan (Terwilliger 2000, Heinemann
2000, Yokoyama et al. 2000). The major structural
proteomics centers are listed in Table 22.1. While
the overall goal of structural proteomics is to provide
representative structures for all protein families,
various different approaches have been used to select
an initial set of target proteins (Brenner 2000, Linial
& Yona 2000). In the broadest sense, structural
genomics aims to provide total coverage of “fold
space” by solving representative structures from every
protein superfamily. Once this has been achieved,
structural databases will provide a comprehensive
resource for the annotation of all future orphan genes.
One current problem is that the Protein Databank
is highly redundant, i.e. most of the structures that
have been added in the last five years match existing structures. This suggests that some structures
are very much under-represented. By deliberately
choosing to solve the structures of hypothetical
proteins, it is hoped that the Protein Databank will
become enriched with proteins containing novel
folds. As stated above, due to the degeneracy of the
“protein folding code” many different sequences can

450

CHAPTER 22

Table 22.1 A selection of structural genomics research consortia and their target organisms.

Program

URL

Target organisms

Berkeley Structural
Genomics Center

http://www.cchem.berkeley.edu/~shkgrp

Methanococcus jannaschii
Pyrococcus horikoshii
Mycoplasma pneumoniae

Joint Center for
Structural Genomics

http://www.jcsg.org/scripts/prod/home.html

Thermotoga maritima
Caenorhabditis elegans

Structural Proteomics
(Ontario Clinical
Genomics Center)

http://www.uhnres.utoronto.ca/proteomics/

Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum

Structure 2 Function

http://s2f.carb.nist.gov

Haemophilus influenzae

Fold Diversity Project

http://proteome.bnl.gov/

Human disease and pathogen
proteins

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Structural Genomics
Consortium

http://www.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/TB/

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Northeast Structural
Genomics Consortium

http://www.nesg.org/

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Caenorhabditis elegans
Drosophila melanogaster
(and human homolog)

RIKEN Structural
Genomics/Proteomics
Initiative

http://www.rsgi.riken.go.jp/

Thermus thermophilus HB8
Arabidopsis thaliana
Mus musculis

Southeast Collaboratory
for Structural Genomics

http://secsg.org/

Caenorhabditis elegans
Pyrococcus furiosus

Human

fold in a similar manner, and the total number of fold
types that exists is likely to be relatively small, in the
region of 1000 (Brenner et al. 1997, Zhang & DeLisi
1998, Wolf et al. 2000a). It is estimated that up to
10,000 protein structures will have to be solved to
identify all the folds in existence, since many of the
solved structures will be related and there will be
no way to establish whether a given hypothetical
protein contains novel or known folds prior to structural elucidation (Burley et al. 1999, Linial & Yona
2000).
Many structural proteomics groups have focused
on microbes, which have smaller genomes (and thus
smaller proteomes) than higher eukaryotes, but a
fundamentally similar basic set of protein structures.
Several groups have chosen thermophilic bacteria
such as Methanococcus jannaschii, Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum, and Thermotoga maritima for
their pilot studies, on the basis that proteins from
these organisms should be easy to express in E. coli in

a form suitable for X-ray crystallography and/or
NMR spectroscopy (e.g. see Kim et al. 1998, Lesley
et al. 2002). A favored strategy in model eukaryotes
is to focus on proteins that are implicated in human
diseases because such research is more likely to
receive generous funding from pharmaceutical companies looking for novel drug targets (see e.g. Burley
et al. 1999, Heinemann et al. 2000, Schwartz 2000).
Overall, the idea has been to choose target structures
that maximize the amount of information returned
from the structural proteomics programs.
The progress of the structural proteomics projects
is difficult to judge at present since the early years
have been taken up largely by technology and infrastructure development. The overall aims can be summarized as shown in Fig. 22.6. A common theme
emerging from these projects is a “funnel effect” in
terms of the number of solved structures compared
to the number of proteins chosen for analysis. This
is due to the failure of a proportion of the target

451

Proteomics II – Analysis of protein structures

Functional prediction

Fig. 22.6 An
overview of key factors
impacting research
programs in structural
proteomics as well as
their desired outcomes.
Reprinted from Norin
and Sundström (2002)
Structural proteomics:
developments in
structure-to-function
predictions. Trends in
Biotechnology 20,
79–84. ©2002, with
permission from
Elsevier.

Methods
Used

Bottlenecks

Structure determination

Structure predication

Sequence comparison
2D and 3D fingerprints
‘Merged approaches’

Protein production
Protein crystallography
Biomolecular NMR

Comparative modeling
Fold prediction and/or
threading ab initio

Gene predication
Erroneous annotation
Unknown sequence motifs

Membrane proteins
Sample properties
Data collection time
Biased sampling

Available templates
Sequence alignment
False positives
Gaps and Insertions

Target identification and selection
Evolutionary relationships
Sequence and structural motifs

Novel folds
Template structures
Co-factor ID from structure

Fold recognition
‘Local’ features
Structural space maps

Structural analysis: fold and features
Functional hypothesis
Functional testing
In vitro function
In vivo function

proteins at each stage of the analysis procedure (e.g.
in the case of X-ray crystallography, the essential
stages are: cloning, expression, solubilization, purification, crystallization, and structural determination). Despite an overall success rate that is probably
no higher than 10% at present, a large number of
structures have emerged from recently established
and semi-automated production pipelines and the
PDB is likely to expand quickly over the next few
years as these structures are confirmed and deposited.
In principle, the value of the structural proteomics approach has been validated by the functional
annotation of many of the initial hypothetical proteins chosen for structural analysis. For example,

Feature analysis
‘Uniqueness’
Feasibility for modulation
Specificity determinants

‘Full’ 3D structural maps
+ Functionally annotated
+ Key feature descriptions

of the first 10 proteins analyzed in the Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum project, seven could be
assigned a function due to structural similarity with
known protein folds or other structural criteria,
including the presence of bound ligands in the
crystal (Christendat et al. 2000; Table 22.2). The
presence of a ligand or cofactor can often be helpful,
and was instrumental in the functional annotation
of M. jannaschii hypothetical protein MJ0577, the
first structure to be generated in a structural proteomics initiative. In this example the crystal contained ATP, suggesting a role in ATP hydrolysis that
was later confirmed by biochemical experiments.
Therefore, even when the structure of a protein does

Table 22.2 Functional annotation of the first 10 proteins to be structurally solved in the Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum structural genomics program (see http://www.uhnres.utoronto.ca/proteomics/ for details and
updates). Note that only one-third of the proteins contained a novel fold, and two of these could be functionally annotated
by other methods (in the case of MTH0152 by the presence of a bound co-factor, and in the case of MTH1048 because of
similarity with a functional ortholog). In total, eight of the 10 proteins could be annotated based on structural data alone.

Protein ID

Recognized fold

Predicted function

Reference*

MTH0040
MTH0129
MTH0150
MTH0152
MTH0538
MTH1048
MTH1175
MTH1184
MTH1615
MTH1699

Three helix bundle
TIM barrel
Nucleotide binding
(novel)
Rossmann fold
(novel)
Ribonuclease H
(novel)
Armadillo repeat
Ferredoxin-like

Zinc-binding RNA polII subunit
Orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase
NAD+ binding protein
Nickel binding
ATPase
RNA polII subunit
(unknown)
(unknown)
Transcription factor
Transcriptional elongation

Mackereth et al. (2000)
Wu et al. (2000)

* Proteins with no explicit references are discussed in Christendat et al. (2000).

Cort et al. (2000)
Yee et al. (2000)

Kozlov et al. (2000)

452

CHAPTER 22

not match any other in the database, structural
analysis may still provide functional information
that can be followed up with other experiments.
Another interesting example is hypothetical protein TM0423, from Thermotoga maritima, which
co-purified and co-crystallized with a molecule of
Tris buffer. In this case, the position of the buffer
suggested that the protein would be able to bind to
glycerol, and identified it as a glycerol hydrogenase.
While one goal of structural proteomics is to
assign functions to hypothetical proteins on the basis
of their relationship to known folds, another is to
discover new folds and assemble a comprehensive
directory of protein space. It appears that about 35%
of the structures emerging from current structural
proteomics initiatives contain novel folds, which
confirms the hypothesis that protein space is finite
and probably comprises at most a few thousand
distinct structures. Every time a new fold is discovered, a little bit more of that protein space is filled.
Furthermore, many of the new folds can be assigned
functions because they bind particular ligands or
have other properties, and this reveals new structure–
function relationships that can be applied more

widely. Sequence analysis and structural comparisons with these novel folds can identify previously
unanticipated evolutionary relationships. At some
point in the future, we may reach the stage where
there is no such thing as an orphan gene or a hypothetical protein.

Suggested reading
Aloy P., Oliva B., Querol E., Aviles F.X. & Russel, R.B.
(2002) Structural similarity to link sequence space:
new potential superfamilies and implications for
structural genomics. Protein Science 11, 1101–16.
Fiser A. (2004) Protein structure modelling in a proteomics era. Expert Review Proteomics 1, 97–100.
Lan N., Montelione G.T. & Gerstein M. (2003) Ontologies for proteomics: towards a systematic definition
of structure and function that scales to the genomic
level. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 7, 44–54.
Sali A., Glaeser R., Earnest T. & Baumeister W. (2003)
From words to literature in structural proteomics.
Nature 422, 216–25.
Zhang C. & Kim S.-H. (2003) Overview of structural
genomics: from structure to function. Current
Opinion in Chemical Biology 7, 28–32.

CHAPTER 23
Proteomics III – Protein interactions

Introduction
We have learned in the last five chapters that
information about the function of a gene can be
gained from the analysis of DNA sequence, genome
organization, protein structure, expression profile,
and mutant phenotype. However, this information
rarely lets us see the whole picture. More often, it
provides suggestions or clues that need to be followed
up by further experiments. This being the case, how
can we rigorously define the function of a gene? At
the most fundamental level, gene function reflects
the behavior of proteins. It is the proteins that actually carry out cellular activities and interact with the
environment, thus gene function can ultimately be
broken down into a series of molecular interactions
that take place among proteins and between proteins and other molecules. When things go wrong,
through mutation or otherwise, it is ultimately due
to the failure of these normal interactions. And our
efforts to treat diseases, through the use of drugs, ultimately depend on the ability of those drugs to modulate protein interactions in a beneficial manner.
In this final proteomics chapter, we discuss the
techniques that are used to study protein interactions,
and how these have recently been adapted for highthroughput analysis on a proteomic scale (Drewes &
Bouwmeester 2003, Figeys 2003, Physiky et al. 2003,
Titz et al. 2004). The function of an uncharacterized
protein is often suggested by its spectrum of inter-

A

B

A

B

actions. For example, if protein X is uncharacterized
but interacts with proteins Y and Z, both of which are
part of the RNA splicing machinery, it is likely that
protein X is involved in this process also. If this reasoning is applied on a global scale, every protein in the cell
can eventually be linked into a functional network
(Walhout & Vidal 2001). This functional network
has been called the interactome (Sanchez et al. 1999).

Protein interactions can be inferred by a
variety of genetic approaches
A number of classical genetic approaches can be
used to show potential interactions between proteins, including screening for suppressor mutations,
i.e. mutations in one gene that partially or fully compensate for a mutation in another (Hartman & Roth
1973). In many cases such mutations exist because
the proteins encoded by the two genes interact. The
primary mutation causes a change in protein structure that prevents the interaction, but the suppressor mutation introduces a complementary change in
the second protein that restores it (Fig. 23.1). Such
genetic techniques have been widely employed in
amenable organisms like Drosophila and yeast.
The advantage of genetic screens is that they provide a short cut to functionally significant interactions,
sifting through the proteome for those interactions that
have a recognizable effect on the overall phenotype.

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

Fig. 23.1 Genetic tests for protein interactions. Suppressor mutations. Two proteins, A and B, normally interact. A mutation in
A prevents the interaction, causing a loss of function phenotype, but this can be suppressed by a complementary mutation in B
which restores the interaction.

454

CHAPTER 23

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

Fig. 23.2 Synthetic lethal effect. The same two proteins can still interact if there is a mutation in either A or B which does not
drastically affect the interaction between them. However, if the mutations are combined, protein interaction is abolished and a
loss-of-function phenotype is generated.

However, it is important to remember that genetic
screens only provide indirect evidence for interactions
and further direct evidence, at the biochemical level,
must also be obtained. One potential problem is that
the suppressor mutation may map to the same gene
as the primary mutation, since second mutations
in the same gene can suppress the primary mutant
phenotype by introducing a compensatory conformational change within the same protein. Even if the
suppressor maps to a different gene, the two gene
products might not actually interact. For example, a
mutation that abolishes the activity of an enzyme
required for amino acid biosynthesis could be suppressed by a gain of function mutation in a transport
protein that increases the uptake of that amino acid
from the environment. Furthermore, the mutations
do not necessarily have to change the structures of
proteins X and Y. An alternative explanation is that
protein X and protein Y must be present at the
correct ratio, which may mean they function in a
stoichiometric complex or may simply indicate
that their activities must be balanced to maintain
metabolic homeostasis. If the primary mutation
changes the quantity of protein X, e.g. by altering the
promoter, it could be suppressed by a compensatory
change in the amount of protein Y caused by a
similar mutation.
Another genetic approach is a screen for enhancer
mutations, i.e. those that worsen the phenotype
generated by a primary mutation (e.g. see Koshland
et al. 1985, Huffaker et al. 1987). One example of this
strategy is the synthetic lethal screen, where individual mutations in the genes for proteins X and Y do
not prevent interaction and are therefore viable, but
simultaneous mutations in both genes prevent the
interaction and result in a lethal phenotype (Fig. 23.2).
An example of this strategy applied on a large scale
has been provided by Tong et al. (2001). These investigators established a synthetic genetic array (SGA)
system in which a mutation in one yeast gene can be
crossed to a set of 5000 viable deletion mutants,
allowing synthetic interactions to be mapped in a

systematic fashion. This can be used to identify all the
proteins involved in the same pathway or complex
as a particular query protein. Mutations in different
genes that generate similar phenotypes often indicate
that the protein products are part of the same complex or the same biochemical or signaling pathway.
For pathways, the order of protein function can often
be established by epistasis. In this type of experiment,
loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations (with
opposite phenotypes) are combined in the same cell
or organism. If a loss-of-function mutation in gene X
overrides a gain-of-function mutation in gene Y, it
suggests that protein X acts downstream of protein Y
in the pathway (Fig. 23.3).
One final traditional genetic strategy worth mentioning is the dominant negative approach, where a
loss-of-function mutation generates a dominantly
interfering version of the protein that quashes the
activity of any normally functioning version of the
protein in the same cell (Herskowitz 1987). This generally suggests that the protein acts as a multimeric
complex and that the nonfunctioning version of
the protein interferes with the normal version when
they are present in the same complex. Like suppressor mutants, however, these methods provide evidence that two gene products interact but they do
not provide definitive proof. There are many other
plausible explanations for such genetic effects and
candidate protein interactions must be confirmed at
the biochemical level.

New methods based on comparative
genomics can also infer protein interactions
The availability of complete genome sequences
for many different organisms allows comparative
genomics to be used for the functional annotation
of proteins. Three methods have been developed to
infer protein interactions directly from genomic data.
These work best in bacteria because more bacterial
genome sequences are available for comparison and

455

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

Loss of function gene X
Gain of function
gene Y

Loss of function gene Y

Wild-type plant

Fig. 23.3 Establishing gene
order in a pathway by
epistasis. A loss of function
mutation in either gene X or Y
causes a plant to become
stunted. A gain of function
mutation in gene Y causes a
growth burst. If the phenotype
of the double mutant is
stunted, then X acts
downstream of Y, but if its
phenotype is tall, then the
converse is true.

What is the phenotype of a double mutant (loss of function gene X and gain of function gene Y)?

Gene X acts downstream of gene Y

because bacterial genomes are often organized into
functional units called operons where the encoded
proteins tend to have related functions.
The first is called the domain fusion or Rosetta stone
method (Fig. 23.4) and is based on the principle that
protein domains are structurally and functionally
independent units that can operate either as discrete
polypeptides or as part of the same polypeptide chain.
Therefore, multi-domain proteins in one species may
be represented by two or more interacting subunits
in another. A well-known example is the S. cerevisiae
topoisomerase II protein, which has two domains,
and which is represented by the two separate subunits GyrA and GyrB in E. coli. The domain fusion
method can be summarized as follows:
•

•

•

The sequence of protein X, a single-domain protein from genome 1, is used as a similarity search
query on genome 2. This identifies any singledomain proteins related to protein X and also any
multi-domain proteins, which we can define as
protein X-Y.
The sequence of protein X-Y can then be used in
turn to find the individual gene for protein Y in
genome 1. If the protein Y gene in genome 1 was
uncharacterized until this point, then the Rosetta
stone method successfully provides the first functional annotation for protein Y. It also provides
indirect evidence that protein Y interacts with
protein X.
The sequence of protein X-Y may also identify
further domain fusions, such as protein Y-Z. This
links three proteins into a functional group and
possibly identifies an interacting complex.

Gene Y acts downstream of gene X

Genome 1

Gene X,
function known

Gene Y,
orphan

X

Y
Use Gene X as query
to screen Genome 2

Genome 2

X

Y

Domain fusion

Use domain fusion gene as
query to screen Genome 1

Genome 1

X

Y

Gene X,
function known

Gene Y,
function known

Fig. 23.4 Principle of the domain fusion (Rosetta stone)
method of functional annotation. The sequence of gene X,
of known function from genome 1, is used as a search query
to identify orthologs in genome 2. The search may reveal
single-domain orthologs of gene X, but may also reveal
domain fusion genes such as XY. As part of the same protein,
domains X and Y are likely to be functionally related. The
sequence of domain Y can then be used to identify singledomain orthologs in genome 1. Thus gene Y, formally an
orphan with no known function, becomes annotated because
of its association with gene X.

As well as revealing previously unknown interactions between different protein families, iterative
screening of multiple genomes can link many different proteins into an interaction map, based on gene
fusion and gene fragmentation events that have
occurred over an evolutionary timescale. Several
experiments involving functional annotation in
bacteria and eukaryotes by this method have been
reported (e.g. see Marcotte et al. 1999, Shirasu et al.
1999) and it has proven possible to construct protein
interaction maps on this basis (Enright et al. 1999).

456

CHAPTER 23

cele

tpal

tmar

syne

rpxx

pyro

paer

paby

mtub

mthe

and exploits the evolutionary conservation of genes
involved in the same function. For example, the
conservation of three or four uncharacterized genes
in 20 aerobic bacteria and their absence in 20 anaerobes might indicate that the products are required
for aerobic metabolism (Pellegrini et al. 1999). Since
proteins usually function as complexes, the loss of
one component would render the entire complex
non-functional, and would tend to lead to the loss of
the other components over evolutionary time since
mutations in the corresponding genes would have
no further detrimental effect. Such differential genome
analysis has been used by Huynen et al. (1998) to
identify species-specific functions of Helicobacter pylori.
The use of phylogenetic profiling to assign a function
to the yeast hypothetical protein YPL207W is shown
as an example in Fig. 23.5.
mpne

mjan

mgen

hpy9

hpyl

hinf

ecol

ctra

cpne

bsub

bbur

aqua

aful

aero

The second comparative genomic method is based
on the knowledge that bacterial genes are often
organized into operons and that such genes are often
functionally related even if their sequences are diverse
(Jacob & Monod 1961). Therefore, if two genes are
neighbors in a series of bacterial genomes, it suggests
they are functionally related and that their products
may interact (Dandekar et al. 1998, Overbeek et al.
1999). Caution is required in expanding this conservation of gene position principle to all bacterial genomes, however, as it is becoming evident that genes
whose functions are apparently unrelated may also
be organized into operons. Furthermore, while there
is some evidence for functionally related gene neighbors in eukaryotes, the value of conserved gene position as a predictive tool remains to be established.
The final method is based on phylogenetic profiling

MSH1
~PMS1

DNA repair

MLH1
PMS1
MSH5
MSH3
MSH6
MSH2
MLH1
YPL207W
RPS4B
RS4E
EIF2A

Ribosomal

RNAP27
R37A
RPL43B
RPS6A
RS6
RS33
RS33
RL31A

Purine
metabolism

R27A
ADE13
PUR2
PURA

Fig. 23.5
Phylogenetic profiles
for three groups of
yeast proteins sharing
similar co-inheritance
patterns. Each row
is a graphical
representation of a
protein phylogenetic
profile, with elements
colored according to
whether a homolog is
absent (white box) or
present (colored box)
in each of 24 genomes
(columns). When
homology is present,
the elements are shaded
on a gradient from light
to dark purple (darker
representing stronger
homology). The
uncharacterized
protein (YPL207W)
clusters with the middle
block, all of which are
ribosomal proteins,
allowing the function
“ribosomal protein” to
be assigned.

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

Traditional biochemical methods for protein
interaction analysis cannot be applied on a
large scale
In the pre-genomic era, direct protein interaction
studies – like all other biochemical analyses – were
carried out largely on an individual basis. There are
many different ways in which protein interactions can
be demonstrated, some of which are discussed briefly
in Box 23.1. The mainstay of traditional protein

457

interaction analysis is a core of biochemical methods
providing direct evidence for interactions. Techniques
such as co-immunoprecipitation, affinity chromatography, and cross-linking have been employed for over
25 years to characterize the interactions of individual proteins (reviewed by Phizicky & Fields 1995).
Furthermore, as discussed in the previous chapter,
there are methods such as X-ray crystallography and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy that can
be used to characterize protein interactions at the

Box 23.1 Biochemical methods for detecting and characterizing
candidate protein–protein interactions
Co-immunoprecipitation. Interaction between
protein X and protein Y is demonstrated by
the addition of (usually monoclonal) antibodies
against protein X to a cell lysate. Precipitation
of the antibody–protein X complex results in
the co-precipitation of protein Y.
Affinity chromatography. Interaction between
protein X and protein Y is demonstrated by
the “capture” of protein X on some kind of
affinity matrix, e.g. a Sepharose column,
when a cell lysate is passed through. Protein Y
also remains attached to the column by
virtue of its interaction with protein X, while
non-interacting proteins are washed through.
Affinity capture may be achieved using
antibodies against protein X. Alternatively,
protein X may be expressed as a fusion with
an epitope tag or a molecule such as
glutathione-S-transferase (GST), which binds
to glutathione-coated Sepahrose beads.
In a related technique, protein X can be
immobilized on a membrane in a manner
similar to the western blot and used to screen
for interacting proteins in a cell lysate.
This has been called a far-western blot
(Blackwood & Eisenman 1991).
Cross-linking. Interaction between protein
X and protein Y is demonstrated where cells
or cell lysates are exposed to a cross-linking
agent, and immunoprecipitation of protein X
results in the co-precipitation of protein Y.
Protein Y can be released by cleavage of the
cross-link.
Fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET).
Interaction between protein X and protein Y is

demonstrated where energy is transferred
from an excited donor fluorophore to a nearby
acceptor fluorophore, a phenomenon called
fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET).
FRET occurs only when the two fluorophores
are up to 10 nm apart, and can be detected
by the change in the emission wavelength of
the acceptor fluorophore. FRET analysis can
be carried out if protein X and protein Y are
conjugated with fluorophores such as Cy3 and
Cy5. Alternatively, they can be expressed as
fusions with different fluorescent proteins, e.g.
enhanced cyan fluorescent protein (donor)
and enhanced yellow fluorescent protein
(acceptor), in which case the technique may
be called BRET (bioluminescence resonance
energy transfer). The advantages of FRET/BRET
analysis are that the normal physiological
conditions inside the cell are maintained
(analysis can be carried out in vivo) and
that transient as well as stable interactions
can be detected (see Day 1998, Mahajan
et al. 1998).
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectroscopy.
Surface plasmon resonance is an optical
resonance phenomenon occurring when
surface plasmon waves become excited at
the interface between a metal surface and
a liquid. Interaction between protein X
(immobilized on the metal surface) and
protein Y (free in solution) is demonstrated
by a change in the refractive index of the
surface layer, which can be detected using a
photodiode array. SPR technology is used to
detect protein interactions on functional
protein chips (p. 439).

458

CHAPTER 23

atomic level. There are also techniques applied at the
level of cell biology, which provide correlative evidence for interaction between specific proteins. For
example, studies in which two proteins are localized
in situ with labeled antibodies can show they co-exist
in the same cellular compartment at the same time.
While these traditional biochemical and physical
techniques are highly informative on an individual
basis, none is particularly suited to high-throughput
analysis. They also provide no easy way to link newly
identified interacting proteins with their corresponding genes. Since the aim of functional genomics is to
determine functions for the many anonymous genes
and cDNAs amassing in databases, high-throughput
strategies that link genes and proteins into functional networks are essential. This has been achieved
by technology development in three areas, which we
will discuss in turn:
1
2
3

Library-based interaction mapping.
High-throughput protein analysis and annotation.
Bioinformatics tools and databases of interacting
proteins, which provide a platform for organizing and querying the increasing amount of interaction data.

Library-based screening methods allow the
large-scale analysis of binary interactions
Library-based methods for protein interaction analysis allow hundreds or thousands of proteins to be
screened in parallel, and all experimentally identified
proteins are linked to the genes or cDNAs that encode
them. Therefore, once interacting proteins have been
detected, the corresponding clones can be rapidly
isolated and used to interrogate DNA sequence
databases (Pelletier & Sidhu 2001). Essentially, there
are two broad classes of library: those in which protein interactions are assayed in vitro and those where
the interaction take place within the environment of
a cell. In most library-based interaction screening
technologies, only binary interactions (i.e. interactions between pairs of proteins) can be investigated.
In vitro expression libraries are of limited use
for interaction screening
In principle, it is possible to use any standard
expression library for protein interaction screening.
Immunological screening (the use of antibodies as
probes) was developed in the 1970s and is essentially

a specialized form of interaction analysis (Broome &
Gilbert 1976; Chapter 6). There is no reason why
other proteins should not also be used as “probes”.
Indeed, a diverse range of proteins has been used in
this manner, with the aim of pulling out interacting
partners. One example is provided by MacGregor
et al. (1990), who sought interacting partners for
the transcription factor c-Jun by screening a cDNA
expression library with a biotin labeled c-Jun probe.
The traditional clone-based library, however, is
not an ideal platform for proteome-wide interaction screening. The studies discussed above involved
labor-intensive and technically demanding screening procedures, which would be unsuitable for highthroughput studies. Phage display (Smith 1985;
p. 147) is a more suitable alternative. The principle
of phage display is the expression of fusion proteins in such a way that a foreign peptide sequence is
“displayed” on the bacteriophage surface. Libraries
of phage can be produced and screened to identify
peptides that interact with a given probe (such as an
antibody) which is immobilized on a membrane or
in the well of a microtiter plate. Screening is basically
a reiterative affinity-purification process, in which
non-interacting phages are discarded and bound
phages are eluted and used to reinfect E. coli. After
several rounds of such “panning” the remaining,
tightly-bound phage are isolated and the inserts
sequenced to identify the interacting peptides (for a
review, see Sidhu et al. (2000)). The advantages of
phage display over other in vitro library systems are
that libraries of great complexity (up to 1012) can
be generated, and several rounds of highly selective
screening can be carried out with intrinsic amplification at each step. Screening and panning can be
carried out in an array format in microtiter dishes,
making the technique amenable to high-throughput
processing. One disadvantage of the system, however, is that only small foreign peptides can be incorporated into the coat protein, and this may limit
the number of interactions that can be detected.
Thus, despite its potential for scale-up, phage display
and similar methods in which peptides are displayed
on the surface of cells have yet to be exploited for
genome-scale interaction analysis.
The yeast two-hybrid system is an in vivo
interaction screening method
The major disadvantage of all in vitro library systems
is that interactions occur in an unnatural environment where the protein may be incorrectly folded

459

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

or partially unfolded. The yeast two-hybrid system,
initially described by Fields & Song (1989), is the
prototype of a range of related techniques in which
protein interactions are assayed in vivo. The principle
of the system is that proteins often comprise several
functionally independent domains, which can function not only when they are covalently linked in
the same polypeptide chain, but also when they are
brought together through noncovalent interactions.
Transcription factors generally contain independent
DNA-binding and transactivation domains, and this
means that a functional transcription factor can be
created if separately expressed DNA-binding and
transactivation domains can be persuaded to interact. On this basis, it is possible to use the two-hybrid
system to confirm interactions between known
proteins and to screen for unknown proteins that
interact with a given protein of interest.

It is the latter approach that is most relevant in
functional genomics. The general strategy is as follows: protein X is expressed as a fusion (a hybrid)
with the DNA-binding domain of a transcription
factor to generate a “bait”. A library of “prey” is
then generated in which each clone is expressed as a
fusion protein with the transcription factor’s transactivation domain. The final component of the system is a reporter gene that is activated specifically by
the two-hybrid transcription factor. Mating between
haploid yeast cells carrying the bait construct and
those carrying the library of prey results in diploid
cells carrying both components. In those cells where
the bait interacts with the prey, the transcription
factor is assembled and the reporter gene activated,
allowing the cells to be isolated and the DNA
sequence of the interactor identified. This principle
is illustrated in Fig. 23.6.

A transcriptional
factor has two
functional domains...

PRINCIPLE

X
Which proteins
interact with
PROTEIN X?

PRACTICE

... a domain that
... and a domain that
binds to DNA
activates transcription
These domains must be brought
together to activate a gene

X

A

Y
Z

Fig. 23.6 The principle of the yeast
two-hybrid system. The bait protein
(X) is expressed as a fusion (or hybrid)
with the DNA-binding domain of a
transcription factor. Yeast expression
libraries are then created in which
many different proteins are expressed
as fusions with the transcriptionactivating domain of a transcription
factor. Mating between bait and prey
strains of yeast results in diploid cells
expressing both the bait and a
candidate prey. Where interactions
occur, a functional transcription
factor is assembled and a test gene is
activated. The interacting protein
can be identified by sequencing the
expression construct in the
corresponding clone in the prey
library.

In one yeast strain,
express PROTEIN X
as a hybrid with the
DNA-binding domain.
This is the BAIT

In another yeast strain,
express ALL OTHER
PROTEINS as hybrids
with the transcriptional
activation domain. This
produces a library of PREY

Systematic crossing
Library of “two hybrid” strains expressing
the bait and one particular prey

Z

X

If bait and prey do not
interact, the test gene
is not activated

X

A

If bait and prey do
interact, the test
gene is activated

RNA
polymerase
PROTEIN A interacts
with PROTEIN X.
Sequence and characterize
gene for PROTEIN A

460

CHAPTER 23

To make the two-hybrid system suitable for
genome-wide interaction mapping, comprehensive
libraries of baits must be used to screen comprehensive libraries of prey, resulting in huge numbers of
combinatorial interactions. Two general strategies
have been devised: the matrix approach and the
random library method. These are discussed in turn
below.
In the matrix approach, defined clones are
generated for each bait and prey
Matrix interaction screening involves panels of
defined bait and prey, i.e. constructs derived from
known open reading frames (ORFs), which are
mated systematically in an array format (Fig. 23.7).
Since this approach depends on the availability of
sequence data corresponding to each protein, it
can only be used for pre-defined proteins. However,
interacting proteins can be identified immediately
on the basis of their array coordinates, and the corresponding cDNAs or genomic clones can be retrieved.
The advantage of the matrix approach is that it is
fully comprehensive and can provide exhaustive
proteome coverage. However, it is also laborious,
because each bait and prey construct must be prepared individually by PCR followed by subcloning

Prey

P1 P2 P3 P4 P5

Bait
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5

Prey

P1 P2 P3 P4 P5

Bait
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5

Fig. 23.7 The matrix system for high-throughput twohybrid screening. Defined panels of bait and prey constructs
maintained in haploid yeast strains are exhaustively tested
for interactions by systematic mating. (Reprinted from
Legrain et al. 2001 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

in the appropriate expression vector. Haploid yeast
cells of opposite mating types are then transformed
with the bait and prey constructs, respectively, and
arrayed in microtiter plates. Specific pair-wise combinations are generated by mating, and candidate
interactions are assayed in the resulting diploid
cells.
The first matrix type study to be reported was a
small-scale but systematic analysis of interactions
among the proteins of the Drosophila cell cycle. In
this investigation, Finley & Brent (1994) screened
a panel of known cyclin-dependent kinases, and
revealed a network of 19 protein interactions
including many cyclins. More recently, the matrix
approach has been used for several proteome-wide
interaction screens in yeast. Uetz et al. (2000) used
a standard matrix approach to screen a proteomewide library of prey constructs (over 6000 ORFs)
with 192 baits. To increase confidence in potential
interactors, the screening was carried out twice and
only interactions identified in both screens were
selected for further analysis. Using this approach,
87 of the baits were shown to be involved in reproducible interactions, with approximately three
interactions per bait (a total of 281 interactions
all together). The same authors also described a
modified matrix assay for high-throughput interaction screening (Fig. 23.8). Instead of generating cell
lines expressing specific prey constructs, cells were
transformed en masse with pools of prey. These were
screened with 5300 ORF baits, and 692 interacting
protein pairs were identified. About half of these
interactions were reproducible.
Pools of clones have also been used in another
global study of protein interactions in yeast. Ito and
colleagues used pools of 96 baits and 96 prey in 430
combinatorial assays such that over four million
potential interactions were tested in parallel (Ito et al.
2000). Approximately 850 positive colonies were
obtained, and short regions of the bait and prey
plasmids were sequenced to derive short sequence
signatures termed interaction sequence tags (ISTs).
This experiment identified 175 interacting protein
pairs, only 12 of which were previously known.
Four million interactions is approximately 10% of
the total number of potential interactions within
the yeast proteome (assuming that every protein
could interact with every other protein). Scaling this
experimental format up to the proteome-wide level,
Ito et al. (2001) identified 4549 interactions among
3278 proteins, 841 of which demonstrated three or
more independent interactions.

461

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

6000 yeast ORFs
BD2 BD3

AD2 AD3

BD1 BD4 BD5

AD1 AD4 AD5

...

6000 BD hybrids
(a) One-by-one matrix approach
AD1

AD2

AD3

BD1

BD1
AD1

BD1
AD2

BD1
AD3

BD2

BD2
AD1

BD2
AD2

BD2
AD3

BD3
AD1

BD3
AD2

...
BD1

BD2

AD2 AD3

×

AD1 AD4 AD5

...

AD1 AD2

×

AD3 AD4 AD5

BD3
AD3

...

BD3

(b) High-throughput matrix approach

...

...

AD
BD

...

6000 AD hybrids

Fig. 23.8 The matrix and pooled matrix strategies. In the pooled matrix system, defined baits are tested against haploid yeast
strains carrying pools of potential prey. If an interaction is detected, the pooled strain can be deconvoluted to identify individual
interactors. The pooling strategy increases the throughput of the assay, depending on the number of constructs per pool.
AD = activation domain; BD = binding domain. (Reprinted from Legrain & Selig 2000 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

A matrix format was also used to screen for interactions within the vaccinia virus proteome. All 266
ORFs were systematically tested against each other
by McCraith et al. (2000) resulting in about 70,000
individual matings. Thirty-seven interactions were
detected, only nine of which were previously known.
Most recently, a matrix assay was used in a genome
pilot study in the mouse, the first large-scale Y2H
screen in a mammalian system (Suzuki et al. 2001).

Bait

Prey fragment library

B1
B2

×

B3

Protein

In the random library method, bait and/or
prey are represented by random clones from a
highly complex expression library
The alternative to matrix format experiments is
to generate prey libraries from random genomic
fragments or cDNAs (Fig. 23.9). The prey can be
screened using defined ORFs as baits, or for comprehensive proteome × proteome analysis, random
libraries can be prepared for bait as well as prey.
Unlike the matrix method, where all constructs are
predefined and candidate interactors can be traced
on the basis of their grid positions in the array,
interacting clones in the random library must be
characterized by sequencing and then they are compared to sequence databases for annotation.
In the first description of such an experiment,
Bartel et al. (1996) generated random libraries of
DNA-binding domain fusions and activation domain
fusions from the genome of the E. coli bacteriophage

Selected
fragments
(prey)
Interacting
domain

Fig. 23.9 The random library system for high-throughput
two-hybrid screening. Defined panels of bait are tested for
interactions against a panel of potential prey maintained as
a high complexity random library. Each interactor may be
defined by a number of overlapping constructs, therefore
allowing specific interacting domains to be identified.
(Reprinted from Legrain et al. 2001 by permission of
Elsevier Science.)

T7, which produces 55 proteins. The authors reported 25 interactions between separate proteins,
only four of which had been previously described. In
several cases, interactions were also found between

462

CHAPTER 23

different domains of the same protein. Interestingly,
a significant number of interactions that had been
previously demonstrated using biochemical and
genetic techniques were not detected in this assay.
The use of defined ORFs to screen for interactions
in a random library has been carried out predominantly in specific protein complexes or biological
processes. Fromont-Racine et al. (1997) used as baits
15 ORFs corresponding to yeast-splicing proteins,
and screened a highly complex random genomic
library containing more than one million clones.
They identified 145 potential prey in a total of 170
interactions. Approximately half of the identified
prey were already-known splicing proteins while the
other half were uncharacterized. The same genomic
library was screened by Flores et al. (1999) using
15 of the 17 known components of the yeast RNA
polymerase III complex, and in a further study of
the spliceosome (Fromont-Racine et al. 2000) using
10 baits omitted from the initial screen. The same
strategy was employed by Walhout et al. (2000) to
investigate the interactions of 29 proteins involved
in vulval development in the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans. Vulval development in this
animal is an important model system in developmental biology and previous studies have reported
direct and indirect evidence for at least 11 specific
protein interactions within this group (reviewed by
Kornfeld 1997). Therefore, the 29 proteins were first
tested against each other in a conventional matrix
format: six known interactions were confirmed and
two novel interactions were revealed. Twenty-seven
of the proteins were then used as baits in a random
library screen; 17 of them were shown to take part in
a total of 148 potential interactions.
More recently, the ORF × library approach has
been used in a series of proteome-wide screens. Rain
et al. (2001) built a protein interaction map of the
bacterium H. pylori based on the results of a yeast
two-hybrid assay in which 261 H. pylori proteins
were screened against a highly complex library of
genomic fragments. Over 1200 interactions were
identified, which allowed nearly half of the genome
to be assembled into a protein interaction map.
Although no protein complexes have been defined
biochemically in this species, homologous proteins
in other bacteria have been studied in this manner.
Interestingly, only about half of the interactions that
are known to occur in E. coli were identified when
homologous H. pylori proteins were used as baits
in the two-hybrid system. Giot et al. (2004) used
the same strategy for a proteome-wide study in

Drosophila, identifying 4780 interactions, while Li
et al. (2004) generated an interaction map for the
entire C. elegans proteome, listing 2135 interactions.
Robust experimental design is necessary to
increase the reliability of two-hybrid
interaction screening data
As a genomic tool, the yeast two-hybrid system suffers from several intrinsic limitations, including its
limitation to the detection of protein–protein binary
interactions, the necessity to localize proteins in the
yeast nucleus, and its reliance on transcription factors. Some of these limitations have been addressed
in derivative systems which are discussed in Box 23.2.
Other problems include the high frequency of false
positive and false negative results, which in some
cases can be remedied by experimental design. False
positives occur where the reporter gene is expressed
in the absence of any specific interaction between
the bait and prey. This may reflect “autoactivation”
where the bait or prey can activate the reporter gene
unassisted, or a phenomenon known as “sticky
prey” where a particular prey protein can interact
non-specifically with a series of baits. In large-scale
two-hybrid screens, these types of false positive are
quite easy to detect and can be eliminated. Other
false positives occur through spontaneous mutations and can be more difficult to identify. Typically,
researchers using matrix format screens use reproducibility as a measure of confidence in their results.
For example, as mentioned above, Uetz et al. (2000)
carried out two independent screens of their matrix
and only accepted interactions occurring in both
screens. Ito et al. (2001) regarded as plausible interactors only those proteins identified by three or more
independent hits. In the analysis of vaccinia virus
(McCraith et al. 2000), each assay was carried out
four times and only those interactions occurring in
three or four of the assays were accepted. Confidence
in random library screens is increased by independent hits from overlapping clones. For example,
Fromont-Racine et al. (1997) devised a system in
which confidence in a prey was assessed according
to the number of overlapping fragments interacting
with a specific bait, the size of the fragments, and how
many times the specific interaction was recorded.
False positives can also be caused by genuine, but
irrelevant interactions. For example, it is possible
that two proteins normally found in separate cell
compartments could, by chance, interact when they
are both expressed in the yeast nucleus.

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

463

Box 23.2 Derivatives of the yeast two-hybrid system
The original yeast two-hybrid system was
developed to test or screen for interactions
between pairs of proteins. Once established,
however, investigators turned their attention
towards improvements and enhancements
that allowed the detection of different types of
interactions. One of the earliest adaptations
made it possible to detect interactions
between proteins and small peptides,
which can be useful to define minimal sets of
conserved sequences in interaction partners.
Other derivatives allowed higher order
complexes to be studied, by expressing
the bait with a known interaction partner
in the hope of attracting further complex
components. A major disadvantage of yeast
for the analysis of higher eukaryotic protein
interactions is the limited amount of posttranslational protein modification that occurs.
This was addressed by carrying out two-hybrid
screens in a strain of yeast expressing a
mammalian kinase, therefore enabling the
usual phosphorylation target sites to be
occupied. Another variant of the yeast
two-hybrid system, known as the yeast
one-hybrid system, is useful for the
identification of transcription factors.
Essentially, this involves the transformation of
yeast with a construct comprising a minimal
promoter and reporter gene, with several
tandem copies of a candidate transcription
factor-binding motif placed upstream. A cDNA
expression library is then prepared in which
all proteins are expressed as transactivationdomain hybrids. These will activate the target
gene only if they contain a DNA-binding
domain that interacts with the chosen
promoter sequence. This system can
only identify proteins that bind to DNA
autonomously. The one-and-a-half hybrid
system is similar, but can detect proteins that
bind DNA as heterodimers with a second,
accessory protein. The one-two hybrid system
can search for both autonomous binders and
proteins that bind only as hetetrodimers.
Another variant of the two-hybrid system,
known as bait and hook or three-hybrid, is

useful for the identification of RNA-binding
proteins or protein interactions with small
ligands. In this system, one of the components
(the hook) comprises the DNA-binding domain
of a transcription factor and a sequencespecific RNA-binding protein that attaches to
one end of a synthetic RNA molecule. The
other end of the RNA molecule contains the
sequence for which candidate interactors are
sought. A prey library is constructed as normal,
with each protein expressed as a fusion to a
transactivation domain. Only in cells where
the prey interacts with the RNA sequence
attached to the hook will the transcription factor
be assembled and the reporter gene activated.
Another interesting variant is the reverse twohybrid system, which uses counter-selectable
markers to screen for the loss of protein
interactions. This is used to identify mutations
that disrupt specific interaction events, and
could conceivably be used to find drugs that
disrupt interactions between disease-causing
proteins. Various systems using dual baits
have also been described, and these can be
used to find mutations that block specific
interactions between a given prey protein
and one of two distinct baits.
As well as derivative systems based on
transcriptional activation as described above,
a number of related technologies have been
developed that do not rely on transcription,
and therefore circumvent problems of
autoactivation. The split ubiquitin system
(ubiquitin-based split protein sensor, USPS)
involves fusing a bait protein to the aminoterminal portion of ubiquitin and prey
proteins to the separated carboxyl terminal.
Interactions reassemble an active ubiquitin
molecule, which then causes protein
degradation, a process that can be monitored
by western blot. The SOS recruitment system
(SRS) or CytoTrap involves the fusion of bait
proteins to a myrisylation signal, thus
targeting them to the plasma membrane,
while prey are expressed as fusions to the
mammalian signal transduction protein SOS.
In yeast strains deficient for CDC25 (the yeast
continued

464

CHAPTER 23

Box 23.2
ortholog of SOS) survival is possible only if
SOS is recruited to the membrane, and this
can only occur if the bait and prey proteins
interact and form a membrane-targeted
complex. The RAS recruitment system (RRS)
is based on similar principles (i.e. the prey
proteins are expressed as RAS fusions) in a
yeast strain deficient for RAS.
Further systems have been devised
which do not depend on yeast at all. Several
bacterial two-hybrid systems have been
developed in E. coli, one of which is based on
the reconstruction of a split adenylyl cyclase
enzyme and its activation of the lac or mal
operons. A mammalian two-hybrid system
False negatives are revealed when known protein interactions are not detected, and when similar
studies reveal different sets of interacting proteins
with little overlap. For example, as discussed above,
Uetz et al. (2000) carried out two different types of
screen, one involving discrete baits and one involving
pools of baits. Although a large number of potential
interactors were found in each screen, only 12 were
common to both screens. The similar proteome-wide
study carried out by Ito et al. (2000, 2001) identified
nearly 3300 interacting proteins, but of the 841
proteins found to be involved in three or more interactions, only 141 were in common with the set of
692 interacting proteins catalogued by Uetz and colleagues (Hazbun & Fields 2001). Similarly, FromontRacine et al. (1997) screened their random genomic
library with three of the same splicing proteins that
Uetz and colleagues used to screen the arrayed yeast
prey ORFs. Interestingly, about 10 high-confidence
prey were identified by each bait in each screen, but
for two of the baits, only two prey were found to be
common to both screens. For the remaining bait,
there were six overlaps (Uetz & Hughes 2000).
The tendency for similar screens to identify different sets of interacting proteins probably has several
causes. First, the selection strategy used in each library may influence the interactions that take place.
Second, the interactions may well be extremely
complex, i.e. each screen only reveals a subset of
the interactions taking place. Third, the matrix and
random library methods have been shown to differ
in their sensitivity. Direct comparison of the two
strategies reveals that random library screening produces more candidate interactors that the matrix

continued
has been developed in which interactions
between bait and prey assemble the enzyme
b-lactamase activity, which can be monitored
in real time. Similarly, the protein
complementation assay involves the
reassembly of the enzyme dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR) from two inactive
components. This is used to monitor protein
interactions in plant cells. Interaction between
bait and prey reassembles the enzyme and
allows it to bind a fluorescein-conjugated
derivative of its normal substrate methotrexate.
Free methotrexate is exported from plant cells
but the enzyme–substrate complex is retained,
allowing fluorescence to be monitored.
method, i.e. the matrix method suffers from a higher
incidence of false negatives. This may be due to
incorrect folding of the fusion protein, due perhaps
to the presence of the fusion partner, or may reflect
undetected PCR errors that occur during clone construction. The problem of false negatives is not so
severe in the case of random libraries because each
prey clone is represented by an overlapping series of
fragments giving much more scope for interacting
functional domains to form. This certainly seems to
have been an advantage in the case of Rain et al.
(2001), who used a prey library of protein fragments
and succeeded in linking many of the H. pylori proteins into a functional network. An extreme example
of the difference between matrix and random library
screening is shown in the study of Flajolet et al.
(2000), who investigated interactions among the
10 mature polypeptides produced by hepatitis C
virus. Constructs expressing these 10 polypeptides in
a matrix format revealed no interactions at all, not
even the well-characterized interactions among the
capsid proteins. However, a library screening using
random genomic fragments revealed all the expected
interactions as well as some novel ones. It is likely that
the prey constructs generated in the matrix strategy
failed to fold properly and therefore could not behave
as the normal proteins would in vivo. The use of fragment libraries rather than intact ORFs has a further
advantage. Where interactions occur between a
bait and a series of overlapping prey fragments, the
common sequence shared by a number of interacting
prey fragments can, in principle, identify the particular
domain of the protein that interacts with the bait
(see for example Siomi et al. 1998, Flores et al. 1999).

465

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

Systematic analysis of protein complexes
can be achieved by affinity purification and
mass spectrometry

purification of specific, known components, and thus
relied on the availability of suitable antibodies. For
whole-complexome analysis, a less selective approach
is required for bait preparation and affinity tags have
been used instead. These can be attached to any protein of interest and used to capture that protein on
a suitable affinity matrix. Two large-scale studies of
the yeast complexome were carried out in 2002. In
one of these studies (Ho et al. 2002), 725 bait proteins selected to represent multiple functional classes
were transiently expressed as fusions with the FLAG
epitope, a short peptide that can be recognized by a
specific antibody. Cell lysates were prepared from
each yeast strain and complexes isolated by affinity
capture with an anti-FLAG antibody. Over 1500
captured complexes were separated by SDS-PAGE
and characterized by tandem mass spectrometry
(Chapter 21). When redundant and non-specific interactions were eliminated, this revealed a total of 3617
interactions among 1578 proteins. In the second
study (Gavin et al. 2002) the tandem affinity purification (TAP) procedure was used. This involves
the expression of each bait protein as a fusion to a
calmodulin-binding peptide and staphylococcal protein A, with the two elements separated by a protease
recognition site (Fig. 23.10). Instead of expressing
these constructs transiently, the investigators used
gene targeting to replace nearly 2000 yeast genes
with a TAP fusion cassette. Yeast cells expressing each
bait–TAP fusion cassette were lysed and the cell lysate
was passed through an immunoglobulin affinity
column to capture the protein A component of the
bait fusion. After washing to remove non-specific
binding, the bound complexes were selectively eluted
by the addition of the protease. Highly selective binding was then carried out in a second round of affinity
chromatography using calmodulin as the affinity

The limitations of the yeast two-hybrid method
are predominantly related to the non-physiological
nature of the assay system. As discussed above,
protein interactions are not studied in their natural
context, but are reconstituted artificially in the yeast
nucleus. This does not accurately reflect the conditions under which most interactions occur (leading
to false negatives) and brings together proteins that
would not usually encounter each other in the cell
(leading to false positives). Overall, only about half of
the interactions predicted from yeast two-hybrid
screens are expected to be true.
Affinity-based methods allow interactions to be
studied in their natural context, reducing the appearance of irrelevant interaction data. Unlike the
yeast two-hybrid system, they also allow the investigation of higher order interactions, including the
purification and categorization of entire complexes.
The major bottleneck to large-scale affinity-based
interaction analysis, that of identifying the proteins
in each complex, has been removed by advances in
mass spectrometry that allow the characterization
of very low-abundance protein samples (in the low
femtomole range). These developments have culminated in the use of affinity purification and mass
spectrometry for the systematic analysis of protein
complexes, providing a global view of protein interactions known as the complexome.
The first reports of complex analysis by mass spectrometry, such as the analysis of the yeast spliceosome
(Neubauer et al. 1997, Gottschalk et al. 1998, Rigaut
et al. 1999) and the human spliceosome (Neubauer
et al. 1998) involved the antibody-based affinity
PCR product

Spacer

CBP

TEV site

Gene
targeting

Homologous
recombination

Chromosome

Fusion
protein

NH2

Protein A

Protein

Gene

Spacer

CBP

Gene

TEV site

Protein A

Fig. 23.10 The tandem affinity purification (TAP) cassette, consisting of a PCR-derived gene-specific homology region for
targeting each yeast gene, and a generic region comprising a spacer, a calmodulin-binding peptide, a protease cleavage site
recognized by tobacco etch virus protease and staphylococcal protein A. The TAP procedure is described in the text. (TEV, tobacco
etch virus; CBP, calmodulin-binding protein.) Reprinted from Gavin A-C. et al. (2002) Functional organization of the yeast
proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. Nature 415, 141–7. © 2002 Nature Publishing Group.

466

CHAPTER 23

matrix in the presence of calcium ions. The proteins
retained in this step were eluted by adding the
calcium chelating agent EGTA, and were examined
by mass spectrometry. Gavin and colleagues found
4111 interactions involving 1440 proteins. Only
10% of the identified complexes had been completely
characterized beforehand. In about 30% of the
complexes, new components were identified while
nearly 60% were entirely novel. Half of the complexes had five or fewer components, and most had
fewer than 20. About 10% of complexes had over
30 components and the largest complex contained
83 proteins.
The mass spectrometry approaches were more
sensitive than the large-scale yeast two-hybrid
experiments when compared to literature benchmarks but still failed to detect about 60% of known
interactions, suggesting a high false negative rate.
In part, this may reflect the fact that affinity-based
methods favor the recovery of stable complexes
rather than transient ones. In contrast, the yeast
two-hybrid system can detect transient interactions
because even short-lived interactions will cause
some activation of the reporter gene. The two mass
spectrometry studies of the yeast complexome also
showed a low degree of overlap, perhaps because of
the different experimental approaches. As mentioned
on p. 464, the recovery of interacting proteins
depends to a large degree on the amount of bait.
Gavin et al. (2002) used a gene-targeting strategy
such that each bait was expressed at roughly physiological levels, whereas Ho et al. (2002) overexpressed
their baits, which may have had a significant effect
on complex architecture. Overall, it appears there
is no ideal method for the large-scale collection of
interaction data and that interaction maps should
be built from a variety of complementary sources.
Protein localization is an important
component of interaction data
Knowledge of protein localization can provide important evidence either to support or challenge the data
from interaction screens. At the very least, showing that two proteins exist in the same cell and in
the same subcellular compartment at the same time,
indicates that such interactions could happen. If this
is backed up by FRET analysis or cross-linking studies
(p. 457), then the interactions are almost certainly
genuine. However, care must be taken to ensure that
such experiments are conducted on intact cells with
normal levels of gene expression, since both cellular

damage and protein overexpression can result in
proteins escaping from their normal compartments
and contaminating others.
As well as helping to confirm or dismiss claimed
interactions, protein localization data can be useful
in their own right. It is in some cases possible to propose a protein’s function based solely on its location,
e.g. proteins located in the thykaloid membrane of a
chloroplast are probably involved in photosynthesis.
For these reasons, many investigators have carried
out studies of subcellular or organellar proteomes
(organelle proteomics) and several attempts have been
made to catalog protein localization data on an even
larger scale.
In one such study, thousands of yeast strains were
generated in which a particular gene was replaced
with a substitute bearing an epitope sequence (see
Davis 2004). Each strain therefore produced one
protein labeled with an epitope tag, allowing the protein to be localized using antibodies and fluorescence
microscopy. High-throughput imaging was used to
determine the localization of nearly 3000 proteins.
The results suggested that about half of the yeast
proteome is cytosolic, about 25% is nuclear, 10–
15% is mitochondrial and 10–15% is found in the
secretory pathway. Within the above classifications,
about 20% of the proteome was represented by
transmembrane proteins. About 1000 proteins of
unknown function were included in the analysis and
knowledge of their locations may help in the design
of further experiments to determine more precise
functions. More recently, Huh et al. (2003) have
carried out a similar study in which proteins were
labeled with green fluorescent protein, allowing
real-time analysis and the localization of 70% of the
yeast proteome into 22 compartment categories.
A pilot experiment has also been performed using
mammalian cells, where the cells were grown on a
DNA chip containing arrays of expression constructs
(Howbrook et al. 2003). The array was first coated
with a lipophilic transfection reagent, a chemical
that promotes DNA uptake, and then immersed in a
dish of rapidly growing cells. The cells covered the
array, took up the DNA in each area of the array and
expressed the corresponding proteins. After a few
days, the array was recovered, the cells were fixed in
situ, and cells in each area were examined by indirect
immunofluorescence to determine where the proteins
were located. A number of well-characterized proteins were correctly localized, validating the accuracy
of the method (e.g. the transcription factor MEFC2
was observed in the nucleus). The major advantage

467

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

of this method is that the number of proteins investigated simultaneously is limited only by the number
of expression constructs that can be fitted on an
array. It may therefore be possible to study 5000–
10,000 different proteins in parallel. Several companies are developing imaging technology which
is compatible with high-throughput localization
studies, with the ultimate aim of building up a threedimensional map of the cell containing localization
and interaction data.

Interaction screening produces large data
sets which require extensive bioinformatic
support
Protein interaction data from a number of international collaborations are being assimilated in
databases that can be accessed over the Internet
(see Table 23.1). Most of them originated from the
large-scale interaction screens described above, and
are largely focused on the yeast proteome (e.g. the

Table 23.1 Databases of protein interactions.

Database

Acronym

URL

Content

References

Database of
Interacting
Proteins

DIP

dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu

Experimentally
determined protein–
protein interactions

Xenarios et al.
(2000, 2001)

Database of
Ligand Receptor
Partners

DLRP

http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/
dip/DLRP.cgi

Ligand–receptor
complexes involved in
signal transduction

Xenarios et al.
(2000, 2001)

Biomoloecular
Interaction
Network
Database

BIND

http://www.blueprint.org/
bind/bind.php

Molecular interactions,
complexes, and
pathways

Bader & Hogue
(2000), Bader
et al. (2001)

Protein-ProteinInteraction and
Complex Viewer

MIPS-CYGD

http://mips.gsf.de/proj/yeast/
CYGD/interaction/

Protein–protein
interactions from
large-scale screens

Mewes et al.
(2000)

Hybrigenics

PIM

www.hybrigenics.fr

Protein interactions in
H. pylori

Rain et al. (2001)

General
Repository for
Interaction
Datasets

GRID

http://biodata.mshri.on.ca/grid

Central repository for
yeast protein
interactions

Molecular
Interactions
Database

MINT

http://cbm.bio.uniroma2.it/
mint/

Protein interactions
with proteins, nucleic
acids, and small
molecules

Curagen
Drosophila
Interactions
Database

http://portal.curagen.com/cgibin/interaction/flyHome.pl

Protein interactions in
Drosophila

Curagen Yeast
Interactions
Database

http://portal.curagen.com/cgibin/interaction/yeastHome.pl

Protein interactions in
yeast

http://www.yeastgenome.org/

Comprehensive
structural and
functional
information,
including interactions

Saccharomyces
Genome
Database

SGD

Uetz et al. (2000)

468

CHAPTER 23

Biomolecular Interaction Network Database, the
Database of Interacting Proteins, the Comprehensive
Yeast Genome Database, and the Saccharomyces
Genome Database). Several tens of thousands of
interactions are listed, many of which await further
functional validation. These databases have been

augmented with additional data from other sources.
Importantly, a potentially very large amount of data
concerning individual protein interactions is “hidden”
in the scientific literature going back many years. It
will be a challenge to extract this information and
integrate it with that obtained from recent highYDR389W
YDR017C

YDL135C
YLR324W

YDR129C

YLL050C

YDR099W

YGR032W

YDL178W

YNL039W

YDR388W

YDR309C

YPR165W

YGR047C

Gal1

YER177W

YLR342W YDL089W

YNL298W

YHL007C
YGR080W

Gal3

Gal80

YHR071W
YMR316CB

YNL020C
YLR229C

YOR257W

YDL179W YHR102W

Gal4

Gal11

YNL188W

YFL039C

YGL154C

YNL289W
YHR061C

YNL243W

YBL085W

YGR152C

YGL254W YNL271C

YMR109W
YMR039C

YER114C

YJL036W

YCL055W

YFL036W
YDL113C

YCR045C

YJL157C

YGL192W

YMR057C

YDR356W

YBR200W

YLR294C

YMR228W

YGL174W

YIR005W
YBR020W

YBL025W

YML043C

YOL105C

YDR498C

YJL025W

YML051W

YLR055C

YMR297W
YMR214W
YBR081C

YBL014C

YLR191W
YNR003C

YGL153W

YGL145W

YDR142C

YHR160C

YPR190C

YDR383C

YHR079C
YDR009W

YNL151C

YOR348C

YDR532C

YDL078C YMR291W

YOR164C

YMR270C

YJR083C

YLR315W

YHL042W

YJL084C YOR110W
YPL248C
YOL051W

YJL034W

YGR252W

YGL013C
YOL148C

YBL010C

YOR298CA

YKR022C

YEL062W

YCL020W

YJR122WYFL002WA

YOR254C

YPL082C

YKR062W
YDR277C

YNL257C
YGR258C

YER148W

YLR292C

YIL143C

YCR042C
YDR216W

YER059W

YJL162C

YOL012C

YKL028W

YDR099W

YIL038C
YJL137C
YLR273C
YML114C

YCR093WYLR243W

YOR250C

YHR128W
YGL180W

YDR469W
YGR253C

YGR241C

YDR389W

YLR005W

YHR016C

YOR062C
YPR185W
YLR258W
YCR035C
YDR167W
YER040W
YPR040W

YDL165W

YBR170C

YGL206C

YJL089W
YDR477W

YML109W

YDR329C

YBR140C

YPR180W

YBR196C

YAL028W

YGR032W

YGL126W

YLR371W
YLR249W

YAL003W

YPR165W
YDR309C
YBR118W
YPR080W

YER177W

YNL126W

YLR049C

YPL222W

YGL028C

YNR032W

YGL134W

YDL070W

YGR048W

YFL039C

YMR316CB
YPL219W
YDL065C

YDR311W
YDR463W

YBL105C
YLR337C YDL179W

YPL161C

YLR233C
YJL211C
YER165W

YNL229C
YGR162W

YLL016W
YGR120C

YOR257W

YHR102W

YDR028C

YOR346W
YGL229C
YNL218W
YIR037W
YMR139W
YPL031C
YLR432W
YNL309W
YOR276W
YOR101W YMR186W YMR102C
YDR382W
YLR305C YNL201C
YOL139C
YHR200W
YJR094C
YGR233C
YOL082W
YGL044C
YLR071C
YGL240W
YKL072W
YFR036WYLR216C
YDR169C
YOL004W YHR197W
YBL075C
YHR178W
YLR423C
YPR115W
YDR207C
YOR178C
YIL061C
YNL330C YBL084C
YMR061W
YHR166C
YPR086W
YMR255W
YMR180C
YLR310C
YJR093C
YDR214W
YKR002W
YJR032W
YML015C
YGL116W
YMR053C
YOR027W
YDR122W
YKL022C
YKL103CYFL056C
YOL130W
YDR146C
YGR014W
YDL008W
YDL020C YBR006W
YKL117W
YDR206W
YOL001W
YKL095W
YAR018C
YDL215C
YBR045C
YOR329C YKL204W
YDL106C
YJL030W
YGL112C
YGL086W
YIL007C
YJL047C
YMR019W

YLR277C

YBR244W
YBR190W

YOR315W

YOR105W

YNL116W

YAR014C

YLR045C

YER133W

YJL042W

YAL047C

YGL073W

YGL024W

YHR100C

YLR117C

YDR130C YPR107C

YDL101C

YHR135C

YER079W YER054C
YPL218W

YCR011C
YMR267W

YIL001W
YCL059C

YJL013C YHR185C
YHR014WYPR008W
YIL004C YGR188C
YOR026W
YNL154C

YLR127C
YPL240C
YJL200C
YLL024C

YKL023W

YKL193C
YLR291C

YJL151C

YKR030W

YGL049C

YIL072W

YLR078C

YGL025C

YLR166C

YOR292C

YNL188W
YLR229C

YGL154C

YLR212C

YPL192C
YOL123W
YPR070W
YLR263W
YDR174W
YKR026C
YCL054W
YGL122C

YDR335W

YPR048W

YER143W
YML103C
YFR002W
YNL112W

YAL030W

YNL090W

YGL254W YNL271C

YJL085W

YIL118W

YDR356W

YGR153W
YBR200W

YJL157C

YOR180C

YLR284C

YER114C
YPL124W

YGL192W
YCL055W

YBR057C

YDL226C
YPL242C

YOR231W

YAL041W

YKL178C
YJL095W

YOR326W
YNL225C
YOR373W

YGR068C YBL102W
YGL019W

YIL035C
YLR147C

YGL015C

YER029C
YNR029C

YBR109C
YLL021W

YKL042W

YOL016C
YML057W

YER149C

YDR264C
YOR212W
YJR086W
YKL008C

YJL064W

YOR061W

YKL112W

YJL065C

YHR140W

YER124C
YOR039W

YLR363C
YHR005C
YHR038W
YJR056C
YOR355W

YHR215W

YGR152C

YMR109W
YMR039C
YNL335W

YLR362W

YHR198C

YKL161C
YPL140C
YOR115C

YDL012C
YIL047C
YDR151C
YLR319C

YPR025C

YFR047C
YLL046C

YOR303W

YOR151C

YJR109C

YMR095C
YHR032W

YPL089C
YLR313C
YDR026C

YDR103W
YML064C YDL097C

YOL133W
YJL141CYPL204W
YOR327C

YKR055W

YMR032W
YBL085W

YNL243W

YHR061C

YMR055C

YIL159W

YHR172W

YOR122C

YDL127W
YOR353C
YIL050W
YOR275C
YMR009W
YGL215W
YBR155W

YDR390C
YMR311C
YBR050C

YGR080W
YNL020C

YNL289W
YNL098C

YBR274W
YPL211W
YNL086W
YBL007C
YIL045W

YIL163C

YNL298W

YHL007C
YHR071W

YJL005W

YOR047C
YNR025C
YOR181W

YOL144W
YDR482C

YHR161C

YCR005C

YDR129C

YNL039W

YGR047C
YLR342W
YDL089W

YKL129C
YER027C

YGR160W

YGR178C

YDR228C

YDL161W

YDL135C

YLR324W
YDR017C YDL178W
YLL050C

YDR388W

YNL138W
YDL138W

YFR042W
YBL101W-A
YPR159W
YGR123C
YBR171W
YKL020C
YJL019W
YIL123W YML038C

YIR006C

YKL081W
YOR127W

YJL178C
YNL122C
YPR049C
YKL061W

YGR167W

YNL084C

YHR206W

YBL043W
YMR181C

YGR268C
YPR072W

YOL101C

YMR092C

YCR009C

YML110C
YNL042W

YGR246C

YDR422C
YGL208W
YML042W
YCR088W

YDL194W
YER171W

YGR274C

YBR198C

YER068W

YDR376W

YJL185C

YBR108W

YHR158C
YLR015W
YDR392W

YJR072C
YLR424W

YIR024C

YLR102C

YCL046W

YGL115W

YLR190W

YDR448W
YOR138C

YOR262W

YMR232W

YDR244W
YJL114W
YDL214C

YBR123C

YOR331C

YGR238C

YPR105C

YHR060W
YDR176W

YLR150W

YLR447C

YPL019C

YLL019C
YMR096W

YFR034C

YDL108W

YFL059W
YNL251C

YDR472W
YIL172C
YGL130W
YGL201C
YAL034WA
YCR087W
YDR110W
YNL027W
YKR068C
YMR129W
YNL333W
YGR003W
YDR460W
YHR145C
YIL113W
YBR254C
YHR030C
YMR322C
YGR009C
YPL228W
YLR433C
YDL159W
YHL046C YEL009C
YLL026W
YGR046W
YJL057C
YDR246W
YML077W
YGL150C YDL002C
YFL060C
YJR034W
YER161C
YDL246C
YKL190W
YLR384C YDL140C
YLR452C
YMR211W
YNL091W
YMR080C YFR033C
YER132C
YNL164C YNL288W
YAL005C
YNL236W
YBR236C
YGR072W
YHR077C
YPL246C
YDR172W YER105C
YHR105W
YGL043W
YER092W
YBL016W
YLR182W
YPL038W
YML095C
YPR187W
YOR370C
YBR143C
YGL095C
YJL128C
YMR197C
YOR359W
YPL237W
YKR034W
YOR208W YKL075C
YPL229W
YOL018C
YNL199C
YER118C
YMR153W
YOR284W
YDR253C
YGR040W
YOR341W
YOL149W
YDR323C
YJL110C
YBL050W
YCL032W
YNL047C
YJL058C YJR131W
YOL129W
YJR077C
YLR269C
YGR155W
YJR159W
YDL056W
YPR041W
YER179W
YER047C
YHL006C
YOR034C
YMR201C
YNL312W
YLL036C
YLR046C YNL021W
YBR080C YAL040C
YGL104C YJR050W YML001W
YDL154W
YER075C
YIL144W
YER100W
YOR361C
YBR270C
YMR309C
YPR103W
YHR152W
YER112W
YNL118C
YGL175C
YDR412W
YNL244C YER111C
YBR133C
YJL092W
YDR078C
YCR086W
Y
EL1
YPL260W
YLR113W
YOR089C
YGL158W
YEL015W
YPL049C
YGL178W YNL103W
YMR213W
YMR094WYIL150C
YMR087WYMR012W
M
YER012W
YHR039C
YLL053C
YDL203C
YOR264W
YML097C
YJR133W
YNL135C YBR079C
YOR157C
YDR128W
YDR357C
YPR019W
YML032C
YDR106W
YFL003C
YJL187C
YOL106W
YMR146C
YPL238C
YLL039C
YGR058W YPL059W
YPL075W
YER136W
YGR136W
YOR167C
YPR182W
YOR229W
YHR129C
YDR480W
YOL020W
YLR208W
YIR017C
YAR007C YJL173C
YDR464W
YDR378C
YPR101W
YCR067C
YDR054C
YOL059W
YML031W
YER052C
YOR372C
YPL174C YIL046W
YHL031C
YOR230W
YKL012W
YLR275W
YGL170C
YNL233W
YBR138C
YER095W
YPL256C
YPL151CYFL005W
YBR023C
YNL147W
YJL184W
YDR369C
YBR017C
YIL105C
YJR132W
YGR179C
YDR326C
YDL195W
YPR011C
YBR202W
YDL088C
YBL079W
YMR117CYMR068W
YML046W
YJR022W
YPL213W
YDR429CYDR439W
YKL145W
YBL061C
YGR119C
YPR163C
YPR017C
YDR070C
YER007CA
YOR362C
YLR026C
YPL085W
YFL017C
YGL238W
YMR224C
YLR264W
YKL203C
YJR060W
YGR140W
YHR084W
YBR094W
YDR032C
YBL026W
YPL018W
YDR201W
YMR233W
YEL032W
YJL124C
YHR083W
YIL109C
YEL037C
YMR168C
YNL092W
YOR160W
YDL043C
YKL074C
YDL064W
YDR076W
YNL250W
YGL172WYKL068W
YPR119W
YOR259C
YDR510W
YOR191W
YLR082C
YPR181C
YPR010C YML049C
YNR022C
YKL049C
YOL034W
YOR159C
YDL160C
YNL307C
YKL089W
YOL006C
YKR010C
YGL048C
YER018C
YPL268W
YCR004C YDR189W
YMR199W
YHR170W
YGL197W
YER162C
YER102W YLR175W
YAL038W
YLR103C
YGL092W
YER110C
YHR165C
YLR274W YLR116W
YOR020C
YIR009WYLR167W
YDR318W
YER146W
YOR375C
YBR052C
YNL272C
YHR089C
YLR293C
YDR004W
YLR347C
YNL216W
YNL286W
YAL032C
YDR432W
YLR335W
YDL071C
YNL004W
YHR098C
YMR308C
YKL015W
YDR386W
YBR211C
YOR098C
Y
SM3
YDL147W
YKR037C
YKL002W
YNL273W
YKL155C
YDL111C
YDL132W
YPR082C
YNL155W
YEL068C
YBR135W
YBR160W
YDR148C
YBR055C
YJR052W
YBR172C
YDR171W
YDR183W
YNL023C
L
YDR394W
YKL173W
YPL105C
YDR192C
YFL018WA
YLR419W
YDL110C
YBR275C
YHR035WYDR139C
YGR158C
YCL066W
YDL030W
YDR315C
YDL013W
YGR218WYMR047C YDL207W
YNL036W
YBL023C
YPR145W
YIL115C
YFR046C
YER045C
YLR259C
YLR456W
YLR323C
YCR002C
YOR078W
YOL021C
YLR392C
YER009W
YDR179C
YKR060W
YOR206W
YDR132C
YDL155W YJR090C
YOR117W
YER116C
YLR100W
YDR104C YNR052C YAL021C YMR043W YIR025W
YNR069C
YGR108W
YCR073C
YDR328C
YBR114W
YJR117W
YIL125W
YIL063C YJR074W
YOR319W
YGR232W
YJR091C
YGR269W
YKL148C
YGL249W
YLL041C
YJL194W
YLR345W YJL203W
YGL096W
YGL221C
YLR210W
YLR442C YLR429W
YFL029C
YJL041W
YDR485C
YER107C
YLR128W
YFL009W
YMR025W
YHR057C
YNL189W
YOR057W
YKL130C
YLR352W
YML088W
YPR054W
YKL101W
YLR224W
YOL058W
YLR399C
YDR227W
YKR101W
YLR097C
YJL061W
YMR125W
YNL031C
YGL097W
YDL029W
YPL133C
YBR221C
YBR234C
YOR038C
YML065W
YLR006C
YCR039C
YJL218W
YOR185C
YDL216C
YJR065C
YLL049W YNR068C
YBR009C
YBR103W
YIL065C
YBL008W
YDR052C
YCL067C
YLR314C
YPR062W
YMR048W
YJL048C
YDR507C
YBR010W
YMR314W
YDL017W
YER065C
YCR084C
YOR204W
YPL178W
YPR020WYDR503C
YDR313C
YIL112W
YCR097W
YDR002W
YML010W
YNL030W
YGR063C
YGR116W
YKL205W
YFL061W
YDL235C
YLR079W
YLR321C
YNR031C
YPL214C
YKR048C
YMR001C
YMR284W
YER025W
YNR048W
YDR395W
YDL236W
YKL039W YGR099W
YIL147C
YDL042C
YLR368W
YPR120C YPL153C
YML028W YBR252W
YCL024W
YPL111W
YKL144C
YMR138W
YOR156C
YCR050C
YFR028C
YMR106C
YJL076W
YHL009C
YFR057W
YDL225W
YJL088W
YHR107C
YMR226C
YDR255C
YJR076C
YLR303W
YLR109W
YLR176C
YCR022C
YDR225W
YDR217C
YDR085C
YDL117W
YNL078W
YOR006C
YKL135C
YDR218C
YBR284W
YPL241C
YIL126W
YIL132C
YOR070C
YOL070C
YOL127WYLR406C
YBR112C
YDL075W
YDR043C
YHR075C
YMR071C

YGL212W
YPL070W

YLR268W

YDR195W
YGR172CYNL146W
YER031C

YDR416W

YIL011W

YFL038C

YGL161C

YGR129W

YNL263C

YNR023W

YER032W

YBR188C YBR205W

YPL022W

YGL198W

YDR084C

YDR211W
YMR269W
YOR106W

YOR260W
YGR083C
YJR007W

YFR052W
YKL196C
YIL013C
YDR273W

YDR061W
YOR036W

YDL229W

YMR183C

YMR236W
YDR468C
YGR117C
YNL064C

YBR134W

YOR128C

YGR057C

YEL023C
YPR102C
YGR085C
YLR322W

YLR376C

YFR037C

YMR091C

YDL011C

YMR035W
YPR078C

YPR093C

YDL051W

YHR106W

YGL035C

YMR150C

YHL019C

YPL259C

YHR141C
YGR024C

YHR216W
YPL110C

YPL025C

YNR050C

YDR087C

YKL090W

YLR075W

YIL082W

YOL108C
YMR317W
YIR012W

YPL128C

YDR123C

YNL279W
YKL017C

Fig. 23.11 Binary interaction map including 1200 interacting proteins based on published interactions. Inset shows close-up of
region highlighted in box. Highlighted in red are cell structure proteins (a single functional class). Proteins in this category can be
observed to cluster primarily in one region. Although interacting proteins are not depicted in a way that is consistent with their
known cellular location (i.e. those proteins known to be present in the nucleus in the center of the interaction map and those
present in plasma membranes in the periphery), signal-transduction pathways (or at least protein contact paths) can be inferred
from this diagram. Reprinted from Tucker C.L., Gera J.F. & Uetz P. (2001) Towards an understanding of complex protein networks.
Trends in Cell Biology 11, 102–6. ©2001 with permission from Elsevier.

469

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

throughput experiments. Several bioinformatics tools
have been developed to trawl through the literature
databases and identify keywords that indicate protein
interactions so that such references can be scrutinized by the human curators of interaction databases
(reviewed by Xenarios & Eisenberg 2001).
Another challenge is to find a simple way to present protein interaction data in a readily accessible
and understandable way. As discussed above, the
yeast proteome is likely to consist of over 6000 basic
proteins (not including variations generated by posttranslational modifications, which could increase
this number substantially). Each protein is thought
to interact, on average, with three others. The simplest way to represent interacting components in a
system is a chart with interacting proteins joined by
lines. Depicting the entire yeast proteome in such a
way is likely to yield a map of incredible complexity
and intricacy, and it is easy to imagine the informa-

tion becoming lost in the mass of detail. Schwikowski
et al. (2000) have assimilated binary interaction
data for about 2500 yeast proteins and generated an
interaction map that included approximately 1200
of them. The map is reproduced in Fig. 23.11 and initially it appears very complex. However, if proteins
with particular functions in the cell are highlighted
they tend to cluster into regional interaction centers.
This can be further simplified to give a functional
interaction map, in which basic cellular processes
are linked together by virtue of protein interactions
(Fig. 23.12). Thus, proteins involved in cell cycle
control interact not only with each other, but also
with proteins involved in related processes such as
cell polarity, cytokinesis, DNA replication, and mitosis. Proteins involved in DNA recombination interact
among themselves and also with proteins involved
in DNA repair and chromosome maintenance.
Figure 23.13 shows the complex interaction map

Amino acid metabolism
Protein
degradation

Membrane
fusion

Mitosis

Meiosis
DNA synthesis

Vesicular transport
Recombination

Cell-cycle
control
Cell
structure

Cell
polarity

DNA repair
Mating
response

Protein folding
Cytokinesis

Protein
modification

Differentiation

Protein
synthesis

Chromatin/chromosome
structure

Protein translocation

RNA
processing

Signal transduction
Nuclear-cytoplasmic
transport

Pol II transcription
Cell stress

Lipid/fatty-acid
and sterol
metabolism

RNA
splicing
Carbohydrate
metabolism

RNA
turnover

Pol I transcription
Pol III transcription

Fig. 23.12 Functional group interaction map derived from the detailed map. Each line indicates that there are 15 or more
interactions between proteins of the connected groups. Connections with fewer than 15 interactions are not shown because one
or a few interactions occur between almost all groups and often tend to be spurious – that is, based on false positives in two-hybrid
screens or other assays. Note that only proteins with known function are included and that about one-third of all yeast proteins
belong to several classes. Reprinted from Tucker C.L., Gera J.F. & Uetz P. (2001) Towards an understanding of complex protein
networks. Trends in Cell Biology 11, 102–6. ©2001 with permission from Elsevier.

470

CHAPTER 23

Fig. 23.13 The protein complex network, and grouping of connected complexes. Links were established between complexes
sharing at least one protein. For clarity, proteins found in more than nine complexes were omitted. The graphs were generated
automatically by a relaxation algorithm that finds a local minimum in the distribution of nodes by minimizing the distance of
connected nodes and maximizing the distance of unconnected nodes. In the upper panel, cellular roles of the individual complexes
are color coded: , cell cycle; , signaling; , transcription, DNA maintenance, chromatin structure; , protein and RNA
transport; , RNA metabolism; , protein synthesis and turnover; , cell polarity and structure; violet, intermediate and energy
metabolism; , membrane biogenesis and traffic. The lower panel is an example of a complex (TAP-C212) linked to two other
complexes (TAP-C77 and TAP-C110) by shared components. It illustrates the connection between the protein and complex levels
of organization. Purple lines indicate physical interactions as listed in the Yeast Proteome Database. Full-color version available at
www.blackwellpublishing.com/primrose

Proteomics III – Protein interactions

resulting from the yeast–protein complex screen
(Gavin et al. 2002). This has been simplified by omitting proteins found in more than nine complexes. As
shown in the insert, each complex can be inspected
for individual proteins, again providing the
researcher with multiple levels of detail. As with the
binary map, complexes with similar functions tend
to share components and interactions, while there
are fewer interactions between functionally unrelated complexes.
The existence of such maps is not only a valuable
basic resource, but as it grows it will provide a basis
to define novel interactions. The interaction map provides a benchmark with which to judge the plausibility of newly discovered interactions, and help
to eliminate false positives. Statistical analysis of the
binary map, for example, shows that nearly threequarters of all protein interactions occur within the
same functional protein group, while most others
occur with related functional groups. An unexpected interaction between proteins involved in,
for example, Pol I transcription and vesicular transport should be regarded with suspicion and tested

471

by rigorous biochemical and physical assays. Many
will be disproved, although some implausible interactions are inevitable.

Suggested reading
Drewes G. & Bouwmeester T. (2003) Global approaches
to protein–protein interactions. Current Opinion in
Cell Biology 15, 1–7.
Figeys D. (2003) Novel approaches to map protein–
protein interactions. Current Opinion in Biotechnology
14, 1–7.
Phizicky E.M., Bastiaens P.I.H., Zhu H., Snyder M. &
Fields S. (2003) Protein analysis on a proteomic
scale. Nature 422, 208–15.
Phizicky E.M. & Fields S. (1995) Protein–protein
interactions: methods for detection and analysis.
Microbiology Review 59, 94–123.
Titz B., Schlesner M. & Uetz P. (2004) What do we learn
from high-throughout protein interaction data?
Expert Review Proteomics 1, 111–21.
Tong A.H.Y., Lesage G., Bader G.D. et al. (2004) Global
mapping of the yeast genetic interaction network.
Science 303, 808–13.

CHAPTER 24
Metabolomics and global biochemical networks

Introduction
The central dogma of molecular biology is that “DNA
makes RNA makes protein”. One consequence of this
dogma is that many scientists have tried to explain
biological phenomena solely in terms of gene expression and protein synthesis. Where consideration has
been given to small molecules it usually has been
at the level of an individual biochemical pathway.
However, there are a number of problems with this
approach. First, metabolic pathways never exist in
isolation but are part of much larger networks.
Second, increases in mRNA levels do not always
correlate with increases in protein levels (Gygi et al.
1999). Third, once translated, a protein may not be
functional due to protein–protein or protein–ligand
interactions. An example of the failure of the traditional approach is a study of the control of glycolytic
flux (ter Kuile & Westerhoff 2001). This showed that
flux is rarely regulated by gene expression alone and
in one particular case was regulated 30% by gene
expression and 70% by metabolism. Thus, in trying
to understand biological systems at the level of the
intact cell, tissue, organ, or organism we need to
construct a global biochemical network that links
mRNA, proteins, and metabolites (Brazhnik et al.
2002). A simple example of such a network is shown
schematically in Fig. 24.1.
The importance of metabolites in global biochemical networks can be deduced from a consideration of
a single biochemical step: the conversion of fumarate
to aspartate by aspartase (aspartate ammonia lyase).
As can be seen from Fig. 24.2, fumarate can participate in seven other reactions and aspartate in nine
others. If the level of aspartase is increased significantly, say by cloning, then this could have the effect
of pulling fumarate away from the other pathways.
At the same time, the increase in the level of aspartate
will affect the levels of some or all of the metabolites
derived directly from it. For example, more aspartate

Metabolic space

Metabolite 1

Metabolite 2

Protein space
Protein 2

Complex 3–4
Protein 1

Protein 4

Protein 3

Gene 2
Gene 3
Gene 1
Gene space

Gene 4

Fig. 24.1 An example of a biochemical network. The
molecular constituents are organized into three levels
(spaces): mRNAs, proteins, and metabolites. Solid arrows
indicate interactions. Three different mechanisms of
gene–gene interactions are shown: regulation of gene 2 by
the protein product of gene 1; regulation of gene 2 by the
complex 3–4 formed by the protein products of genes 3
and 4; and regulation of gene 4 by metabolite 2 which is
produced by protein 2. Reproduced from Brazhnik et al.
(2002), with permission from Elsevier.

may be channeled towards threonine, lysine, methionine, and isoleucine. As the levels of these other
amino acids increase, key enzymes will undergo
feedback inhibition and the synthesis of many more
may be repressed. That is, there will be a major
shift in the amounts and activities of many enzymes
caused by changes in the amounts of different metabolites. Furthermore, the number of different proteins affected will be related to the magnitude of the
increase in the level of the activity of the aspartase.

473

Metabolomics and global biochemical networks

Fig. 24.2 Changes in
metabolite flux caused
by overexpression of a
protein as exemplified
by the different
biochemical reactions
involving fumarate. In
(a), the double-headed
arrows represent the
steady-state levels of
the eight different
reactions in which
fumarate participates.
In (b), the
overexpression of
aspartase reduces the
levels of seven of these
metabolites and
increases the level of
aspartate.

Maleic acid

Succinate

N6-DCE-AMP

Malate

Fumarate

Arginosuccinate

Fumarylaceto-acetate

Aspartate

Carboxymethyl-oxysuccinate

(a)

Nine other reactions

Maleic acid

Succinate

N6-DCE-AMP

Malate

Fumarate

Arginosuccinate

Aspartase
Fumarylaceto-acetate

There are different levels of metabolite
analysis
There is a long history of metabolite analysis but
until recently this was focused on (i) metabolite target analysis and (ii) metabolite profiling. The first of
these is concerned with the utilization of specialized
protocols for the study of difficult analytes, e.g. phytohormones. The second attempts quantitation of
a small number of predefined metabolites, e.g. the
blood analytes used as biomarkers of human
disease. With the development of genomics and its
associated ’omics, two new forms of metabolite analysis have been developed: (iii) metabolomics and
(iv) metabolic fingerprinting. The goal of metabolomics is the unbiased identification and quantitation
of all the metabolites present in a sample taken from
an organism. Metabolic fingerprinting focuses on the
collection and analysis of data from crude metabolite
mixtures to rapidly classify samples without the
need to separate individual metabolites. Of these four
approaches, metabolomics is the one best suited for
the investigation of global biochemical networks
because it focuses on the quantification of individual

Aspartate

Carboxymethyl-oxysuccinate

Nine other reactions

metabolites without any bias as to choice of target.
Metabolite fingerprinting is more suited to the
identification of gene function. For example, in a
technique known as FANCY (Functional ANalysis
by Co-response in Yeast), metabolic fingerprinting
is used to compare metabolic changes following
perturbation of known genes with those following
perturbation of genes of unknown function. If an
unknown gene yields a similar result it is assigned a
similar function (Raamsdonk et al. 2001).
Metabolomics studies in humans are different
from those in other organisms
There is a significant difference in the kinds of
metabolomics studies that will be undertaken by
plant biologists and microbiologists compared with
animal biologists. Plant biologists almost certainly
will use inbred lines and will either want to compare
different lines (cultivar 1 versus cultivar 2 or genetically modified versus non-modified) or the effect
of environment (soil, weather, fertilizer, etc.) on a
particular line. Microbiologists will have a similar
approach. In both cases one controls the genotype

(b)

474

CHAPTER 24

and the environmental conditions for the growth of
the organisms. The situation can be quite different
with animals, particularly humans. For a start,
human populations are outbred and so in most cases
no two individuals will have the same genotype.
Also, different individuals can have vastly different
diets even when they are part of the same family or
household and some of them may be taking drugs
(legal and illegal!). Many drugs induce one or more
members of the cytochrome P450 family of metabolic
enzymes and the metabolite profile of a cell will be
completely different pre- and post-induction (see
Nicholson & Wilson 2003 for fuller discussion). Both
of these problems can be minimized if one is using
laboratory animals.
There is a final problem with animal metabolomics and that is the role of the gut microflora. All
animals with an alimentary canal have associated
gut microflora and the composition of this microflora
can be substantially changed by alterations in diet or
by antibiotic treatment. This is important for four
reasons. First, many gut microbes secrete molecules
such as vitamins that are essential for survival of
their host. Second, the microbes may break down
dietary components into molecules that can be
assimilated as food (e.g. rumen microbes in cows).
Third, the body can excrete compounds into the gut
where they are transformed and then readsorbed.
Finally, many gut organisms behave as commensals
but can become pathogens as a result of environmental triggers (Gilmore & Ferretti 2003), and most
readers will be familiar with the physiological and
biochemical consequences that can ensue.
Because humans are all outbred and controlling
their diet is very difficult, most metabolomics studies
on humans have focused on the identification of
particular metabolites that are indicative of disease
(biomarkers) and the toxicity of drugs. The use of
biomarkers is well established in clinical chemistry
and a good example is the association of glucose in
the urine with diabetes. However, there are many
diseases such as degenerative changes and cancer
whose presence cannot be detected until there are
gross physiological changes. By screening all the
metabolites in plasma or excreted in urine it might
be possible to identify ones that are associated with
a particular disease state. Once upon a time, such
a “needle in a haystack” approach would have
involved screening each and every metabolite individually. In reality, educated guesses would be made
about potential biomarkers and only these would
be screened, with a negative correlation being the
obvious outcome. However, the global approach to

the analysis of all the metabolites in a cell, i.e.
metabolomics, can be used to make the search for
biomarkers much more tractable.
From the above discussion it should be clear
that plant biologists and microbiologists use global
metabolite analysis in a different way from those
studying disease in humans. One consequence has
been the development of confusing and inconsistent
terminology. Most biologists who work with plants
or microbes define metabolomics as the unbiased
identification and quantitation of all the small
molecules (<1000 daltons) in the system being studied and this is the definition used in this chapter.
Other workers, particularly those interested in
human metabolism, use the term metabonomics. To
some, metabolomics and metabonomics are one
and the same thing whereas to others metabonomics
refers specifically to the complexities of animal
metabolism described above. A third group consider
metabolomics to refer to metabonomics at the level
of a single cell rather than a larger system. Leaving
definitions aside, the experimental methods and
the associated data analysis essentially are the same
regardless of the system being studied.
Compromises have to be made in choosing
analytical methodology for metabolomics
studies
The number of different compounds that can be
found in any one cell is vast and these compounds
will be representative of many different classes, e.g.
amino acids, carbohydrates, lipids, steroids, vitamins,
flavonoids, plus a vast range of secondary metabolites and xenobiotics such as terpenoids, macrolides,
etc. The physical properties of these different classes
of molecule mean that no single method will permit
the separation and quantitation of all of them. Of all
the methods developed for metabolite detection only
two have the capability of resolving large numbers
of metabolites: NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (Bundy et al. 2002, Fiehn et al. 2000,
Nicholson et al. 2002). Even so, under the best conditions these methods will discern only 500 –1000
different molecules and it is not known whether this
represents 5% or 50% of the total compounds in a
sample. Furthermore, many of the compounds that
are resolved by mass spectrometry may remain
unidentified.
A major technological challenge encountered
in metabolomics is dynamic range (Sumner et al.
2003). Dynamic range defines the concentration
boundaries of an analytical determination over

475

Metabolomics and global biochemical networks

which the instrumental response as a function of
analyte concentration is linear. Most mass spectrometers have a dynamic range of 104–106 for pure
compounds but this range is significantly reduced
by the presence of other chemical components. This
means that compounds present at high levels can
interfere with the detection of compounds present at
low levels. This problem is confounded by ion suppression from matrix effects if crude cell extracts are
not cleaned up first (Choi et al. 2001) by means of
gas or liquid chromatography. Gas chromatography
separates molecules on the basis of their volatility
and double-bond character whereas liquid chromatography is mostly used to separate molecules on
the basis of their hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity.
Many different types of mass spectrometer are
available and the ones most commonly used in
metabolomics are described in Box 24.1. (Also see
Box 21.1 which discusses mass spectrometry in

proteomics.) A good workhorse system is gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (GC/MS)
but this requires that samples be volatile. This
requirement is met by chemical derivatization but
adds to the analysis time. Typically, GC/MS is performed with affordable single quadrupole mass
analyzers and provides high separation efficiencies
that can resolve complex biological mixtures. Newer
GC/MS systems incorporating time-of-flight (TOF)
mass analyzers give higher mass accuracies and the
detectors have higher scan speeds thereby permitting much higher sample throughput.
NMR spectroscopy is a rapid, non-destructive
method and can be used for metabolite identification. However, if suffers from two disadvantages
when compared to mass spectrometry: low sensitivity (Fig. 24.3) and difficulties in resolving individual
metabolites if no chromatographic separation is
used prior to detection and identification. For

Box 24.1 Basic mass spectrometry in metabolomics
Overview
A mass spectrometer is an instrument that
measures the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of
individual molecules that have been converted
into ions, i.e. electrically charged. The different
functional units of a mass spectrometer
are shown in Fig. B24.1. The sample to be
analyzed enters the vacuum chamber through
an inlet and in the case of hyphenated mass
spectrometry this will be a connection from

Fig. B24.1 Schematic
representation of the key
components of a mass
spectrometer. (Figure reproduced
courtesy of the American Society
for Mass Spectrometry.)

a gas chromatograph (GC/MS), liquid
chromatograph (LC/MS) or other separation
system. The sample is ionized and volatilized
in the ion source and the gas phase ions are
sorted in the mass analyzer according to their
m/z ratios. The detector collects the sorted
ions and the ion flux is converted to a
proportional electrical current. Finally, the
data system records the magnitude of these
electrical signals as a function of m/z and
converts the information into a mass spectrum.

Gas phase ions

Ion sorting

Ion detection

Source

Analyzer

Ion
detector

Inlet

Vacuum
pumps

Data system
Data
handling

Sample
introduction
Data
output
Mass spectrum
continued

476

CHAPTER 24

Box 24.1
The ion source
Samples can be ionized in a number of
different ways. One common method (electron
ionization or electron impact) is to bombard the
vaporized sample with a beam of energetic
electrons. The energy of the electrons
generally is much greater than that of the bonds
which hold the molecule together. Thus, not
only does ionization occur but bonds are
broken and fragments are formed giving rise
to the ions other than the intact molecule that
appear in the mass spectrum. Although both
positive and negative ions are generated in the
ion source, most of the ions formed are positive
and hence the vast majority of measurements
are carried out in positive mode.
Electron ionization is a very hard
process and it can lead to such extensive
fragmentation of the sample that mass
and structure are difficult to determine.
Consequently, lower energy techniques
have been developed based on chemical and
desorption ionization. The methods most used
in metabolomics are listed in Table B24.1.

instruments, the ions are detected after mass
analysis by converting the detector-surface
collision energy of the ions into emitted ions,
electrons, or photons that are sensed with
light or charge detectors.
The data system
Computer-based data systems are used
for spectrum acquisition, storage, and
presentation. Typically they include software
for quantitation, spectral interpretation,
and compound identification. The latter
is achieved by comparing the spectrum
obtained from a sample with the spectra of
known compounds that are maintained in
online libraries. Spectra are available for only
a small proportion of all known compounds
and each type of mass spectrometer generates
a different spectrum for any one pure
compound. That is, there are different spectral
libraries for each type of mass spectrometer
and some libraries are much more extensive
than others.
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)

The analyzer
The analyzer uses dispersion or filtering to sort
ions according to their m/z ratio or a related
property. The most widely used analyzers are
magnetic sectors, quadrupole mass filters,
quadrupole ion traps, Fourier transform ion
cyclotron resonance spectrometers (FT-ICR),
and time-of-flight mass analyzers. Basically,
the various types of analyzer differ in their
resolving power and the accuracy with which
m/z ratios can be determined.
The detector
In all mass spectrometers, other than FT-ICR

Technique

continued

This a procedure for identifying compounds in
complex mixtures and determining structures
of unknown substances. The instrument
used has two mass analyzers. Ions with a
particular m/z value are selected in the first
analyzer, fragmented, and sent to the second
analyzer.
Further information
The reader wishing more information should
consult the education section of the website of
the American Society for Mass Spectrometry
(www.asms.org/whatisms/).

Means of ionization

Matrix assisted laser desorption/
ionization (MALDI)

Impact of high-energy photons on a sample
embedded in a solid organic matrix

Electrospray

Formation of charged liquid droplets from which
ions are desolvated or desorbed

Table B24.1 Some
soft ionization methods
used in mass
spectrometry.

477

Metabolomics and global biochemical networks

these reasons NMR spectroscopy is more suited to
metabolic fingerprinting, e.g. biomarker discovery,
than a comprehensive analysis of cellular metabolites. Regardless of what analytical method is used
it will be a compromise between speed, selectivity,
and sensitivity (Weckwerth & Fiehn 2002, Fiehn &
Weckwerth 2003, Sumner et al. 2003).

NMR

10–6mol

LC/UV

10–9mol

GC/MS

10–12mol

LC/MS

10–15mol

Sample selection and sample handling are
crucial stages in metabolomics studies

LC/L.LF

10–19mol

CE/L.I.F

10–23mol

Ideally, metabolomic data should accurately describe
physiological processes as responses to developmental, genetic, or environmental changes but problems
of sample selection make this goal difficult to achieve.
The first problem is one of compartmentalization.
At its simplest, during sample preparation all subcellular compartmentalization is lost. The problem is
more complex when one deals with organs since the
different tissues within the organ may have different
metabolite distributions. A good example of this is
the potato tuber shown in Fig. 24.4. Samples were

Fig. 24.3 A comparison of the relative sensitivities of
different analytical methods. NMR has rapid analysis times
but suffers from lower sensitivity thus allowing visualization
of only the more concentrated metabolites (i.e. the tip of the
iceberg). GC/MS and LC/MS provide good selectivity and
sensitivity. CE/LIF (laser induced fluorescence) provides
very high sensitivity but lower selectivity. Reproduced from
Sumner et al. (2003), with permission from Elsevier.

Valine

Glucose

GABA

Inositol

Citric acid

Sucrose

Fructose

Disaccharide
Increasing levels of metabolites
Valine
GABA
Citric acid
Fructose
Glucose
Inositol
Sucrose
Disaccharide

Fig. 24.4 The distribution of eight different metabolites throughout a single potato tuber. (Figure courtesy of Prof.
Howard Davies.)

478

CHAPTER 24

taken from different positions within the tuber and
analyzed for eight metabolites. Each metabolite
had a complex distribution pattern and no two
patterns were the same. The second problem is one
of timing, and tomatoes provide a good example.
Suppose one wishes to determine the metabolite content of a number of different tomatoes. All of these
tomatoes should be analyzed at exactly the same
stage in the ripening process but how does one determine that they all are at the same stage?
If any organism is being maintained in a relatively
stable environment then its metabolome also will be
stable, at least over time periods ranging from a few
minutes to a few hours. However, once a tissue sample is taken from the organism then the metabolome
of that tissue no longer is in a stable environment
and will undergo rapid changes. Therefore it is
important that samples are flash frozen as soon as
possible and in a consistent manner.

Plant material grown under
controlled conditions

Microbial
cell pellet

After sampling the tissues need to be homogenized
and the small molecules extracted in an unbiased
process. However, there are no comprehensive comparisons of extraction techniques in terms of their
reproducibility, robustness, and recovery of the
different classes of compounds that will be present
(Weckwerth & Fiehn 2002). The most commonly
used technique is extraction with alcohols or water/
alcohol mixtures but the efficiency of this will vary
greatly depending on the tissue being sampled; e.g. a
lettuce leaf, a sugar-rich fruit, a fatty tissue such as
liver, and a hard tissue such as bone. It also is unclear
which factors most affect the robustness of protocols,
which is the susceptibility to error caused by the use
of slightly altered conditions. Such alterations may
include subtle differences in extraction times, temperatures, solvent compositions, and staff skills.
If the object of a study simply is the analysis of the
metabolome then the process depicted in Fig. 24.5

Animal
tissue

Harvest with rapid
freezing

Tissue
homogenization

Comprehensive
extraction
Aliquoted
Derivatization

GC/MS

LC/MS or other method

Data
deconvolution

Data
deconvolution

Network
computation

Fig. 24.5 Schematic
representation of
the steps involved
in carrying out an
analysis of the
metabolites in a sample.

479

Metabolomics and global biochemical networks

Tissue sample

Extract with organic solvent

Metabolites in supernatant

Cell debris, proteins, DNA, and RNA in pellet

Extraction with buffer
Analysis
Proteins and RNA in supernatant
Extract with phenol

Fig. 24.6 Schematic
representation of the
methodology required
if it is desired to
construct a
biochemical network
linking metabolites,
proteins, and mRNA.

Proteins in phenol phase

RNA in buffer phase

Analysis

Analysis

Data normalization, assembly in database, computation of cross correlation networks

will suffice. However, if the objective is to generate a
global biochemical network then the transcriptomic,
proteomic, and metabolomic analyses must be done
on the same sample. A suitable schema for this has
been proposed by Fiehn & Weckwerth (2003) and is
shown in Fig. 24.6.
Metabolomics produces complex data sets
A single sample analyzed by GC/MS can provide data
on up to 500 distinct compounds and this makes
simple comparison of data sets impossible. Special
methods are needed to reduce the dimensionality of
the data and present it in simple visual form. These
methods are of two types: supervised and unsupervised. In supervised methods there is an initial calibration step using a training data set, i.e. a set of
observations that have been classified by independent means. This approach is particularly applicable
to metabolic fingerprinting where profiles are generated for samples known to come from “normal” and
“diseased” tissue and then used to classify samples
of unknown origin. Another example is the FANCY
approach to identifying gene function that was
described earlier (p. 473). Here, a fingerprint is

generated for a knockout mutant of a gene of
unknown function and compared with the fingerprints of knockout mutants in different genes of
known function.
Unsupervised data analysis methods require no
information other than the original data set and for
metabolomics the most popular method is principal
component analysis (PCA). In PCA the variance in
a set of multivariate data (the levels of different
compounds detected by MS) is described in terms of
a set of underlying orthogonal variables (principal
components). That is, the original metabolite concentrations can be expressed as a particular linear
combination of the principal components. PCA is a
linear additive model in that each principal component (PC) accounts for a portion of the total variance
of the data set. Often, as few as two or three PCs
account for over 90% of the total variance and these
are used to reduce the dimensionality of the data set.
The data then can be visualized graphically when the
values for the first two PCs (two-dimensional graphs)
or three PCs (three-dimensional graphs) are plotted.
An example of the way in which PCA can be used
to analyze metabolomics data is provided by a study
on potato tubers that had been engineered to be frost

480

CHAPTER 24

Fructose

Glucose

Sucrose

fructans. When these components were removed
from the data set (Fig. 24.8b) the separation was lost.
This confirms that the metabolic differences seen
between the transgenic lines and the parent were
due to the activity of the transgenes. If the separation
had not been lost then it would have suggested that
other metabolic changes also were important.
In the potato example quoted above, the objective
was to compare lines where the genetic differences
were simple and known, i.e. addition of one or two
transgenes. However, in many metabolomics experiments the genetic changes might not be known as in
a comparison of diseased versus normal tissue. This
makes the analysis more difficult. If metabolomic
analysis shows that diseased tissue has a higher
level of fumarate then fumarate level can be used as
a biomarker for that disease. To understand why
fumarate levels are increased it is necessary to know
the changes in all the eight compounds that can be
interconverted to fumarate (Fig. 24.2). If one of these
eight compounds is decreased significantly then less
fumarate is going down the pathway of which it is
the first intermediate. On the other hand, if one of
these eight compounds is increased then the reactions producing it could have increased flux and
could be forcing it in the direction of fumarate. That
is, one uses metabolic networks to try and establish
the chain of causality that leads to the observations.
For this to be possible it is essential to have metabolic
maps that are comprehensive. This is not always the
case (see below).

Sucrose

Sucrose

1-ketose

SST

+

“Fructan” (up to DP 5?)
FFT

+
+

or

G(F)n + G(F)m
G(F)n–1 + G(F)m+1
FFT enzymatic model

“Inulins” (longer chain
linear polymers)

Fig. 24.7 The synthesis of fructans and inulins from
sucrose. SST, sucrose:sucrose 1-fructosyltransferase; FFT,
fructan:fructan 1-fructosyltransferase. (Figure courtesy of
Prof. John Draper.)

resistant. One transgenic line expressed a foreign gene
for sucrose:sucrose 1-fructosyltransferase (SST) and
the other line expressed SST and a fructan:fructan
1-fructosyltransferase (FFT). These result in the
production of fructans and inulins, respectively
(Fig. 24.7). Using GC/MS, the relative concentrations
of the different metabolites in the two transgenic
lines and the parent potato cultivar were determined. Figure 24.8a shows a PCA analysis of these
data and it is clear that separation can be achieved
using the first two PCs. Furthermore, the different
compounds in the samples that are responsible for
the separation can be identified. Analysis of the
top five of these components showed them to be
(a)

(b)
6

5
4

4
3
2
Second PC

Second PC

2

0

1
0
–1

–2

–2
–4
–3
–6

–6

–4

–2

0
First PC

2

4

6

–4

–6

–4

–2

0

2

4

First PC

Fig. 24.8 The effect of individual metabolites on the clustering of potato genotypes. (a) Principal component analysis with
data for all metabolites included. (b) Principal component analysis after removal of the top five discriminatory metabolites. Black
points, data for parent strain; light purple points, data for the line carrying the SST gene; dark purple points, data for the line
carrying SST and FFT. (Figure courtesy of Prof. John Draper.)

6

Metabolomics and global biochemical networks

A good reference database is an essential
prerequisite for preparing global biochemical
networks but currently is missing
As mentioned above, it is useful to use a biochemical context for visualization and interpretation of
metabolomic data. Ideally, this biochemical context
should include the known enzyme activities that
catalyze each reaction, the proteins with these
activities, their biochemical characteristics (kM
values, etc.), and the genes that encode them.
That is, we need a detailed biochemical database. A
number of such databases exist (for summary, see
Sumner et al. 2003) but none meet the needs of
metabolomics. The one that is most used is KEGG
(Kanehisa et al. 2002; www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/).
It contains information on genes from Genbank
(p. 158) and biochemical reactions from the ENZYME
database (Bairoch 2000). There are a number of
problems associated with the KEGG database. First,
it lists the enzymes present in each organism only if
an annotated gene sequence for that enzyme activity exists in Genbank. However, many enzymes are
known to exist in particular organisms even though
the corresponding gene has not been found from
analysis of whole-genome sequences. Second, just
because a gene can be annotated based on sequence
similarity does not necessarily mean that the proposed enzyme activity actually exists in the cell.
The presence of the activity needs to be confirmed
experimentally. Finally, KEGG takes no account of
isozymes but for metabolomics the different tissue
distributions and kinetic characteristics could be
very important. Despite these reservations, KEGG is a
very useful database.

481

Suggested reading
Sumner L.W., Mendes P. & Dixon R.A. (2003) Plant
metabolomics: large-scale phytochemistry in the
functional genomics era. Phytochemistry 62, 817–
36.
Presents a good overview of the methodologies associated
with plant metabolomics.
Nicholson J.K. & Wilson I.D. (2003) Understanding
“global” systems biology: metabonomics and the continuum of metabolism. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery
2, 668–76.
Presents an overview of mammalian metabolic conversions
and proposes a new probabilistic model to help understand
idiosyncratic drug reactions.
Ideker T. & Lauffenburger D. (2003) Building with a
scaffold: emerging strategies for high- to low-level
cellular modelling. Trends in Biotechnology 21,
255–62.
Describes the use of computational cellular models for the
analysis of complex biological systems.
Dunn W.B., Bailey N.J. & Johnson H.F. (2005) Measuring the metabolome: current analytical technologies.
Analyst 130, 606–25.
A review that discusses the advantages and disadvantages of mass spectrometry, NMR, and other spectroscopy
techniques.
Wang M., Lamers, R.J., Korthout H.A. et al. (2005)
Metabolomics in the context of systems biology:
bridging traditional Chinese medicine and molecular
pharmacology. Phytotherapy Research 19, 173–82.
Dunckley T., Coon K.D. & Stephan D.A. (2005)
Discovery and development of biomarkers of neurological disease. Drug Discovery Today 10, 326–34.
Two papers that illustrate the different ways that metabolomics is being utilized to solve problems.

Part IV
Applications of Gene Manipulation and Genomics

CHAPTER 25
Applications of genomics: understanding the
basis of polygenic disorders and identifying
quantitative trait loci

Introduction
Geneticists use the term “complex trait” to describe
any phenotype that does not exhibit classical Mendelian recessive or dominant inheritance attributable
to a single gene locus. Most, but not all, complex traits
can be explained by polygenic inheritance, i.e. these
traits require the simultaneous presence of mutations
in multiple genes. Polygenic traits may be classified
(Lander & Schork 1994) as discrete traits, measured
by a specific outcome (e.g. development of diabetes or
cleft palate), or quantitative traits measured by a continuous variable (e.g. grain yield, body weight). In general, discrete traits are of particular interest to human
geneticists and quantitative traits are of particular
interest to plant and animal breeders, although there
are significant exceptions. There is another difference.
Human populations are outbred whereas plant and
animal breeders use inbred populations and the methods used for gene identification reflect these differences.
Despite the differences cited above, the general
methodology used to identify genes associated with
discrete traits and quantitative traits is the same (Glazier
et al. 2002). This methodology involves four steps:
1 Establish significant genome-wide evidence for
linkage or association of the trait with a particular chromosomal region. Typically, the trait will
be localized to a 10–30 cM region of the genome.
In humans this equates to 10–30 Mb of DNA
with a coding potential of 100–300 genes.
2 Fine mapping is undertaken to reduce the size of
the critical region to one that permits sequencing
to be undertaken.
3 DNA sequence analysis is undertaken to identify
any candidate nucleotide variants.
4 Attempts are made to demonstrate that replacement of the variant nucleotide(s) results in the
swapping of one phenotype for another.
This basic methodology forms a recurring theme in
the examples described in the sections that follow.

Investigating discrete traits in outbreeding
populations (genetic diseases of humans)
Mendelian traits are relatively easy to study but account for only a small proportion of human disease.
Most human diseases are polygenic in nature and these
include cardiovascular disease, asthma, cancer, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, obesity, alcoholism, and
schizophrenia. Such complex diseases involve multiple
genes, environmental effects, and their interactions.
Rather than being caused by specific and relatively
rare mutations, complex diseases and traits may
result principally from genetic variation that is relatively common in the population. The fact that a
large number of genes, many with small effects, are
involved in many complex diseases greatly complicates efforts to identify genetic regions involved in
the disease process and makes replication of results
difficult. The distinction in terminology between
Mendelian and complex traits is not meant to imply
that complex diseases do not follow the rules of
Mendelian inheritance; rather, it is an indication
that the inheritance pattern of complex traits is
difficult to discern.
There are three main approaches to mapping
the genetic variants involved in a disease: functional
cloning, the candidate gene strategy, and positional
cloning (see Chapter 6). In functional cloning,
knowledge of the underlying protein defect leads to
localization of the responsible gene. In the candidate gene approach, genes with known or proposed
function with the potential to influence the disease phenotype are investigated for a direct role
in disease. Positional gene cloning is used when
the biochemical nature of the disease is unknown
(the norm!). The responsible gene is mapped to the
correct location on the chromosome and successive
narrowing of the candidate interval eventually
results in the identification of the correct gene.
The gene-finding methods described above are
used in conjunction with two other analytical
methods. These are model-free (or nonparametric)

486

CHAPTER 25

linkage analysis and association (or linkage disequilibrium) mapping. Model-free methods make
no assumption about the inheritance pattern, the
number of loci involved, or the role of environment.
Rather, they depend solely on the principle that
two affected relatives will have disease-predisposing
alleles in common. In linkage disequilibrium (LD)
mapping one looks at co-inheritance in populations
of unrelated individuals. There is another difference.
Linkage analysis can be used only for coarse mapping (e.g. only 10% recombination will be observed

in a region of 10 Mb), whereas LD can be used for fine
mapping as resolution is limited only by the spacing
of the markers used. Consequently, most effort is
being devoted to developing physical maps with a
high marker density.
The reader who is not familiar with the methods
used in the study of human genetics will have great
difficulty in understanding the primary literature.
The reason for this is the widespread use of specialist
terminology. To assist readers a glossary is provided
in Box 25.1.

Box 25.1 Glossary of terms used in human genetics
Ascertainment bias
This is the difference in the likelihood that
affected relatives of the cases will be reported
to the geneticist as compared with the
affected relatives of controls.
Concordance
If two related individuals in a family have the
same disease they are said to be concordant
for the disorder (cf. discordance).

happens to carry a relatively rare allele, that
allele will have a far higher frequency than it
had in the larger group from which the new
population was derived. The founder effect
is well illustrated by the Amish in Pennsylvania,
the Afrikaners in South Africa, and the FrenchCanadians in Quebec. An early Afrikaner
brought the gene for variegate porphyria
and the incidence of this gene in South Africa
is 1 in 300 compared with 1 in 100,000
elsewhere.
Genome scan

Discordance
If only one member of a pair of relatives is
affected with a disorder then the two relatives
are said to be discordant for the disease (cf.
concordance).
Familial aggregation
Because relatives share a greater proportion
of their genes with one another than with
unrelated individuals in the population,
a primary characteristic of diseases with
complex inheritance is that affected
individuals tend to cluster in families.
However, familial aggregation of a disease
does not necessarily mean that a disease has a
genetic basis as other factors could be at work.

This is a method whereby DNA of affected
individuals is systematically analyzed using
hundreds of polymorphic markers in a search
for regions that are shared by the two sibs (cf.)
more frequently than on a purely random
basis. When elevated levels of allele sharing
are found at a polymorphic marker it suggests
that a locus involved in the disease is located
close to the marker. However, the more
polymorphic the loci studied the more likely it
is that elevated allele sharing occurs by chance
alone and hence one looks for high LOD
scores.
Index case
See “proband”.

Founder effect

Multiplex family

If one of the founders of a new population

A family with two or more affected members.
continued

Applications of genomics

Box 25.1

487

continued

Nonparametric (model-free) analysis

Relative risk

This method makes no assumption concerning
the number of loci or the role of environment
and chance in causing lack of penetrance
(q.v.). Instead, it depends solely on the
assumption that two affected relatives will
have disease-predisposing alleles in common.

The familial aggregation (q.v.) of a disease can
be measured by comparing the frequency of
the disease in the relatives of an affected
individual with its frequency in the general
population. The relative risk ratio is designated
by the symbol l. In practice, one measures l
for a particular class of relative, e.g. sibs,
parents.

Parametric (model-based) linkage analysis
This method of analysis assumes that there is
a particular mode of inheritance (autosomal
dominant, X-linked, etc.) that explains the
inheritance pattern. Therefore one looks for
evidence of a genetic locus that recombines
with a frequency that is less than the 50%
expected with unlinked loci.

Sibs
Brothers and sisters are sibs.
Simplex family
A family in which just one member has been
diagnosed with a particular disease.

Penetrance
In clinical experience, some disorders are not
expressed at all even though the individuals in
question carry the mutant alleles. Penetrance
is the probability that such mutant alleles are
phenotypically expressed.
Proband
The member through whom a family with a
genetic disorder is first brought to attention
(ascertained) is the proband or index case if he
or she is affected.

Model-free (nonparametric) linkage analysis
looks at the inheritance of disease genes and
selected markers in several generations of the
same family
Any kind of genetic marker can be used in linkage
mapping and in classical genetics these markers
are other phenotypic traits. In practice, it is difficult
to detect linkages for loci more than 25 cM apart.
Thus, to be useful, markers need to be distributed
throughout the genome at a frequency of at least
one marker every 10 cM. In humans there are not
enough phenotypic traits that have been mapped
to give anything like the desired marker density. For
this reason, physical markers are very attractive. The

Transmission disequilibrium test
This tests whether any particular alleles
at a marker are transmitted more often
than they are not transmitted from
heterozygous parents to affected offspring.
The benefit of this test is that it only requires
trios (q.v.).
Trio
An affected child plus both parents.

first such markers to be described were restriction
fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs, see p. 346)
but the ones favored today are the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs, see p. 349) because they
occur once every 1000 bp. When large multigeneration pedigrees are available (e.g. the Centre d’Etude
du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) families, p. 362)
linkage analysis is a powerful technique for locating
disease genes and has been applied to a number of
simple Mendelian traits. The probability of linkage
is calculated and expressed as a logarithm10 of odds
(LOD) score, with a value above 3 being significant
(Box 25.2). If linkage to a marker is observed then
the chromosomal location of that marker is also the
location of the disease gene.

488

CHAPTER 25

Box 25.2 Logarithm of odds scores
(Adapted from Connor & Ferguson-Smith 1997)
Figure B25.1 shows pedigrees for two families
affected by an autosomal dominant disorder.
In family A the affected man in the second
generation has received the disease allele
together with RFLP allele 1 from his father.
Similarly, he has received the normal allele and
RFLP allele 2 from his mother. If these two loci
are on the same chromosome then it follows
that he must have one chromosome that
carries the disease allele together with RFLP
allele 1 and the other carries the normal
allele and RFLP allele 2. Consequently, the
arrangement of the disease and marker alleles,
also known as the phase, can be deduced with
certainty in this individual. If the loci are linked
it will be apparent in the next generation as a
tendency for the disease allele to segregate
with RFLP allele 1 and the normal allele to
segregate with RFLP allele 2. This is indeed the
case in family A, where four affected offspring
carry RFLP allele 1 and the five unaffected
children only carry RFLP allele 2.
Family A

1/1

2/2

1/2

1/2

1/2

2/2

2/2

1/2

2/2

2/2

1/2

2/2

2/2

2/2

1/2

2/2

1/2

Family B
1/2

1/2

2/2

2/2

2/2

1/2

1/2

Fig. B25.1 Two families with an autosomal dominant
trait showing results of DNA analysis for a marker
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) with
alleles 1 and 2.

If the loci described above are not linked,
the probability of such a striking departure
from independent assortment occurring by
chance in nine offspring is the probability of
correctly calling heads or tails for nine
consecutive tosses of a coin. That is:
(0.5)9 = 0.002.
However, if these two loci are linked such
that there is only a 10% chance of crossing
over (i.e. a recombination fraction, or q, of
0.1), the probability of the disease segregating
with RFLP allele 1 or the normal allele with
RFLP allele 2 is:
(0.9)9 = 0.4.
It follows that linkage at 10% recombination
is 200 times (0.4/0.002) more likely than no
linkage. Similarly, if the disease allele and the
RFLP allele are identical, then no
recombination could occur and the
recombination fraction would be zero. For this
family, this is 500 times (1/0.002) more likely
than no linkage.
The usual way of representing these
probability ratios is as logarithms, referred to
as logarithm of odds (LOD) or Z scores. For
family A at a recombination fraction of 10%
the LOD score is log10 200 = 2.3 and at a
recombination fraction of zero it is log10
500 = 2.5.
The figure also shows a two-generation
pedigree for family B. In this case, all four
affected siblings carry RFLP allele 2 and
another four healthy siblings do not. As in
family A, this signifies a marked disturbance of
independent assortment and suggests linkage
between the disease and RFLP allele 1. If this is
the case, the youngest child must represent a
recombinant because he has inherited RFLP
allele 1 from his father but not the disease.
However, it could be that the youngest child is
non-recombinant and all the other children
represent crossovers between the two loci.
continued

Applications of genomics

Box 25.2
Although this is much less likely, it cannot be
excluded in the absence of phase information
from the grandparents. Calculation of the LOD
scores for such a family is more complicated
because the two possible phases must be
taken into account. Whichever phase is
considered, at least one recombination
event must have taken place and hence
the recombination fraction cannot be zero
(see Table B25.1).
Analysis of the combined data from the two
families shows that the maximum LOD score is
3.3 and this occurs at 10% recombination.
Table B25.1 Logarithm of odds (LOD) scores at values
of the recombination fraction from 0 to 40% for the two
families shown in Fig. B25.1.

Recombination fraction (%)
0

10

20

30

40

Family A
Family B

2.7
−∞

2.3
1.0

1.8
0.9

1.3
0.6

0.7
0.3

Total

−∞

3.3

2.7

1.9

1.0

Conventional linkage analysis seldom works for
complex diseases. The involvement of many genes
and the strong influence of environmental factors
mean that large multigeneration pedigrees are seen
only rarely. Consequently, analysis is undertaken of
families in which both parents and at least two children (sib pairs) have the disease in question. These
are known as nuclear families. The way this analysis
is undertaken is shown in Fig. 25.1. Suppose that we

ibd
Share 2
Share 1
Share 1
Share 0

AB

CD

A C

A
A
B
B

C
D
C
D

AFBACs
B, D
B, –
–, D
–, –

489

continued
The ease with which data from phase-known
and phase-unknown families can be combined
in this way is the reason why the use of LOD
scores has become universal for the analysis
of linkage data. The maximum value of the
LOD score gives a measure of the statistical
significance of the result. A value greater
than 3 is usually accepted as demonstrating
that linkage is present and in most situations
it corresponds to the 5% level of significance
used in conventional statistical tests.
Conversely, if LOD scores below – 2 are
obtained, this indicates that linkage has been
excluded at the corresponding values of the
recombination fraction.
The relationship between the
recombination fraction and the actual physical
distance between the loci depends on several
factors. A recombination fraction of 0.1 (10%
recombination) corresponds to a map distance
of 10 cM. However, with increasing distance
between the loci the recombination fraction
falls as a result of the occurrence of double
crossovers. In humans, 1 cM is equivalent to
1 Mb of DNA on average.

Fig. 25.1 (left) Affected sib pair families. A nuclear family
pedigree is shown with the father (᭿) and mother (᭹) in the
first row and the two affected children of either sex (᭜) in the
second row. Assume for simplicity that we can distinguish
all four parental alleles, denoted A, B, C, and D in the genetic
region under study, with the parental alleles ordered such
that A and C are transmitted from the father and mother,
respectively, to the first affected child. Four possible
configurations among the two offspring with respect to the
alleles inherited from the parents are possible: they can share
both parental alleles (AC); they can share an allele from the
father (A) but differ in the alleles received from the mother
(C and D); they can share an allele from the mother (C) but
differ in the alleles received from the father (A and B);
or they can share no parental alleles in common. These four
configurations are equally likely if there is no influence of the
genetic region under consideration on the disease. The
parental alleles that are never transmitted to the affected sib
pair in each family type are used as a control population in
association studies using nuclear family data, the so-called
affected family-based control (AFBAC) sample. (Redrawn
with permission from Thomson 2001.)

490

CHAPTER 25

believe that a certain region of the genome is implicated in a disease state and that we can distinguish the
four parental chromosomes (A, B, C, D). If the region
under test does not carry a gene predisposing to disease then the chances of two affected sibs having two,
one, or no parental chromosome regions in common
are 25, 50, and 25%, respectively. On the other hand,
deviation from this Mendelian random expectation
indicates that the affected sibs have chromosome
regions that are identical by descent (ibd) suggesting
the presence of genes predisposing to the disease in
question. Physical markers, particularly microsatellites, are ideal for distinguishing the chromosome
regions derived from each parent. Not only are micro-

satellites highly polymorphic, but a sufficient number
of them have been placed throughout the genome.
The first complex disease to be analyzed using
genome-wide linkage scans was type 1 diabetes
(Field et al. 1994, Hashimoto et al. 1994) and this
demonstrated linkage to the major histocompatibility complex (see Box 25.3). Since then, a number
of other complex diseases have been mapped including bipolar mood disorder (McInnes et al. 1996)
and Crohn’s disease (Hugot et al. 1996, Rioux et al.
2000). A similar methodology has been used to
identify quantitative trait loci (QTLs) controlling
adult height (Hirschhorn et al. 2001) and human
longevity (Geesaman et al. 2003).

Box 25.3 The major histocompatibility complex
Higher animals, including humans, are able
to distinguish between “self” and “non-self”
and to mount a reaction against a very broad
spectrum of foreign antigens. This reaction is
mediated by the immune response. Genetic
factors play a key role in the generation of the
normal immune response and, as a result of
mutation, in aberrant immune reactions
including immunodeficiency and autoimmune
disease. A large number of genes play a role in
the development and functioning of the
immune system but only those of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) are
considered here.
The MHC is composed of a large
cluster of genes located on the short arm of
chromosome 6. On the basis of structural and
functional differences these genes are divided
into three classes and each class is highly
complex and polymorphic. Two of the three
classes correspond to the genes for human
leukocyte antigens (HLA) that are cell surface

HLA locus
HLA-A
HLA-B
HLA-C
HLA-DR (b chain only)
HLA-DQ (a and b chains)
HLA-DP (a and b chains)

proteins. These antigens are very important for
the normal functioning of the immune system
and were first discovered following attempts
to transplant tissue between unrelated
individuals. A class I antigen consists of two
polypeptide units, a polymorphic peptide
encoded by the MHC, and an invariant
polypeptide encoded by a gene outside the
MHC. Class two molecules are heterodimers of
a and b subunits, both of which are encoded
by the MHC. The class III genes are not HLA
genes but include genes for polymorphic
serum proteins and membrane receptors.
The HLA system comprises many genes
and is highly polymorphic with many
antigenic variants having been recognized
at the various loci (Table B25.2). Because
the HLA alleles are so closely linked they are
transmitted together as haplotypes. Each
individual has two haplotypes, one on each
copy of chromosome 6, and the alleles are
co-dominant. Each child receives one

Antigenic variants (no.)

DNA variants (no.)

25
53
11
20
9
6

83
186
42
221
49
88

Table B25.2 Protein
and DNA variation at
HLA loci. Because of
the redundancy of
the genetic code it is
possible to have more
DNA sequence variants
than protein variants.

continued

491

Applications of genomics

Box 25.3

continued

A

B

C

D

A1
B8
CW1
DW6
DR2

A2
B7
CW2
DW5
DR3

A9
B5
CW5
DW1
DR7

A3
B12
CW4
DW2
DR4

A

C

A

D

B

C

B

D

A

D

A1
B8
CW1
DW6
DR2

A9
B5
CW5
DW1
DR7

A1
B8
CW1
DW6
DR2

A3
B12
CW4
DW2
DR4

A2
B7
CW2
DW5
DR3

A9
B5
CW5
DW1
DR7

A2
B7
CW2
DW5
DR3

A3
B12
CW4
DW2
DR4

A1
B8
CW1
DW6
DR2

A3
B12
CW4
DW2
DR4

Fig. B25.2 The inheritance of HLA haplotypes. Usually a haplotype is transmitted, as shown in this figure, as a unit.
In extrememly rare instances, a parent will transmit a recombinant haplotype to the child.

haplotype from each parent (Fig. B25.2)
and there is a 25% chance that two children
with the same parents inherit matching HLA
haplotypes. Because the success of tissue
transplantation is closely linked to the degree
of similarity between HLA haplotypes, the
favored donor for bone marrow or organ
transplantation is a brother or sister who
has an identical HLA haplotype.
As more and more information has
accumulated about the HLA genes it has
become clear that there is an association
between specific HLA genes or haplotypes
and certain diseases. For example, in one
national study, only 9% of the population
had the HLA-B27 allele but it was present in
95% of those with the chronic inflammatory
disease ankylosing spondylitis. Similarly, 28%
of the population carried the HLA-DQ2 allele
but it was present in 99% of the population
with celiac disease. It is unlikely that HLA genes
alone are responsible for specific diseases.
Rather, they may contribute to disease
predisposition along with other genetic and
environmental factors. For example, they
probably influence the susceptibility of
different individuals to particular infectious
agents. They also can play a role in complex
diseases as exemplified by type 1 diabetes.
There are two major types of diabetes
mellitus: juvenile-onset or insulin dependent
(type 1) and adult-onset or insulinindependent (type 2). Type 1 diabetes

has a frequency of 0.5% in the Caucasian
population and results from an autoimmune
destruction of the insulin-producing cells in
the pancreas. Genetic factors alone do not
cause type 1 diabetes because if one twin of an
identical pair develops the disease there is only
a 40% chance that the matching twin also will
become diabetic. Nevertheless, there is strong
evidence for genetic factors and, as noted on
p. 490, the first study on model-free analysis
of a complex disease linked type 1 diabetes
with the MHC locus. Individuals heterozygous
for HLA-DR3 or HLA-DR4 are particularly
susceptible to diabetes. This fits with the
concept of type 1 diabetes being an
autoimmune disease, since DR3 and DR4
are found in a locus known to regulate the
immune response.
Further insight into the mechanism
responsible for type 1 diabetes has come from
a molecular analysis of the HLA-DQ genes. The
presence of aspartic acid at position 57 of the
DQb chain is closely associated with resistance
to type 1 diabetes, whereas other amino acids
at this position confer susceptibility. About
95% of patients with type 1 diabetes are
homozygous for DQb genes that do not
encode aspartate at position 57. Since position
57 of the b chain is critical for antigen binding
and presentation to T cells, changes in this
amino acid could play a role in the
autoimmune response that destroys the
insulin-producing cells.

492

CHAPTER 25

Linkage disequilibrium (association) studies
look at the co-inheritance of markers and the
disease at the population level
Whereas linkage analysis is undertaken in families,
association studies are undertaken on unrelated
cases and controls. If there is a significant association of a marker and a disease state then this may
implicate a candidate gene in the etiology of a disease. Alternatively, an association can be caused by
LD of marker allele(s) with the gene predisposing to
disease. LD implies close physical linkage of the
marker and the disease gene. As might be expected,
LD is not stable over long time periods because of the
effects of meiotic recombination. Thus, the extent of
LD decreases in proportion to the number of generations since the LD-generating event. In general, the
closer the linkage of two SNPs then the longer the LD
will persist in the population but other factors do
have an influence, e.g. extent of inbreeding, presence
of recombination hotspots, etc. Reich et al. (2001)
have shown that, in a US population of northern
European descent, LD typically extends for about
60 kb. By contrast, LD in a Nigerian population
extends for a much shorter distance (5 kb) reflecting
the fact that northern Europeans are of more recent
evolutionary origin.
So, it should be apparent that the ideal population
for LD studies will be one that is isolated, has a
narrow population base, and can be sampled not
too many generations from the event causing the
disease mutation. The Finnish and Costa Rican
populations are considered ideal because they are
relatively homogenous and show LD over a much
wider distance than US populations. This is particularly important because it influences the number of
markers that need to be used. In a typical linkage
analysis one uses markers every 10 Mb (10 cM) but
for LD studies one needs many more markers. For a
US population of northern European descent the
markers would need to be every 20–50 kb on average but this could be extended to every 200–500 kb
for Finnish or Costa Rican populations.
Genome-wide LD scans have been undertaken to
locate simple Mendelian traits. Lee et al. (2001) were
able to use such a methodology to localize the critical
region for a rare genetic disease (SLSJ cytochrome
oxidase deficiency) in a close-knit isolated community. More typically, LD analysis is used to fine-map
traits following initial localization to chromosomal
regions by linkage analysis as described in the previous section. SNPs are ideal for this purpose because

over 10 million of them from different ethnic groups
have been mapped (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/).
For studies on complex diseases, evidence for LD is
sought in nuclear families or trios because this
avoids possible ethnic mismatching between
patients and randomly ascertained controls. In
such cases, the parental alleles that are never transmitted to the affected offspring are used as the
controls, the so-called affected family-based control
(AFBAC) sample.
Two studies on Crohn’s disease illustrate how LD
can be used in fine mapping (Fig. 25.2). In the first
study (Rioux et al. 2001), linkage analysis had
shown that susceptibility to Crohn’s disease mapped
to an 18-Mb region of chromosome 5 with a maximal
LOD score at marker D5S1984. Using 56 microsatellites, LD was detected between Crohn’s disease and
two other markers, IRF1p1 and D5S1984, which
are 250 kb apart. All the known genes in this region
were examined for allelic variants that could confer
increased susceptibility to Crohn’s disease but no
candidate genes were identified. This was a little
surprising because this genomic region encodes the
cytokine gene cluster that includes many plausible
candidate genes for inflammatory disease. Because
no obvious candidates had emerged, a detailed SNP
map was prepared with the markers spaced every
500 bp. Many of these SNPs showed LD with susceptibility to Crohn’s disease, confirming the presence of
a gene predisposing to Crohn’s disease in the area
under study.
In the second study (Hugot et al. 2001), linkage
analysis had mapped a susceptibility locus for Crohn’s
disease to chromosome 16. With the aid of 26 microsatellites the locus was mapped to a 5-Mb region
between markers D16S541 and D16S2623. LD
analysis showed a weak association of Crohn’s disease with marker D16S3136, which lies between the
other two markers. A 260-kb region around marker
D16S3136 was sequenced but only one characterized gene was identified and this did not appear to be
a likely Crohn’s disease candidate. Sequencing also
identified 11 SNPs and three of these showed strong
LD with Crohn’s disease in 235 affected families,
indicating that the susceptibility locus was nearby.
By using the GRAIL program and an expressed
sequence tag (EST) homology search (p. 171) a number of putatively transcribed regions were identified
and one of these (NOD2, but now known as
CARD15) was identified as the susceptibility locus.
Further analysis showed that some of the SNPs used
in the LD study were the causative mutations.

493

Applications of genomics

(a)
Linkage map

LOD score

20cM
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Linkage disequilibrium map
IRF1P1

D5S1984

983kb

113
kb

(b)
Linkage map

D16S541

D16S3136
1

D16S2623

Linkage
disequilibrium
map

D16S2623

D16S541

4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0

D16S541
D16S3136

LOD score

50cM

300
kb
Candidate
gene

9
10
2 3 4 5–8 12 13

11

30
kb

SNPs

the NOD2/CARD15 locus. These polymorphisms
were R702W (an arg/trp replacement at position
702), G908R (a gly/arg replacement at position 908),
and a frameshift mutation (1007fs). Together these
mutations represent 81% of the polymorphisms
seen at the NOD2/CARD15 locus and a search for
other mutations at this locus identified a further 27
variants (Lesage et al. 2002). Once the different
mutations had been identified population studies
became possible and these have shown different allele
frequencies in different CD populations throughout
the world. For example, the NOD2/CARD15 mutations are absent in Japanese CD populations but
frequent in European populations. Also, Jewish CD
populations have a much higher prevalence of
a particular allele than the three most common
European mutations combined. More important,
mutations at the NOD2/CARD15 locus account for
only 25% of cases of CD and determine only ileal disease (Ahmad et al. 2002) whereas mutations in the
HLA genes (see Box 25.3) determine overall susceptibility to CD.
The NOD2/CARD15 locus encodes a protein that
is a member of a family of intracellular cytosolic
proteins that have a role in response to bacterial
antigens. Expression studies have shown that it is
synthesized in epithelial cells in the small and large
intestine. The highest levels of expression are in the
specialized epithelial Paneth cells, which are located
in the crypts of the small intestine. Although the
function of the Paneth cells is unknown they have
been shown to secrete antibacerial substances in
response to bacterial cell-wall components.
The structure of the NOD2/CARD15 protein is
shown in Fig. 25.3. The C-terminal portion of the
molecule consists of a leucine-rich region (LRR)
that is involved in bacterial binding. Approximately
1 2

3

4

577
NBD

11

12

1007fs

In the study of Crohn’s disease (CD) described above,
Hugot et al. (2001) mapped three polymorphisms to

8 9 10

G908R

1 28 124127 220 273
CARD

Once a disease locus is identified, all the
’omics can be used to analyze it in detail

7

R702W

Fig. 25.2 Details of the mapping of two loci associated with
Crohn’s disease. (a) Mapping of a locus on chromosome 5 by
Rioux et al. (2001). (b) Mapping of a locus on chromosome
16 by Hugot et al. (2001). The numbers along the bottom line
correspond to the SNPs used in fine mapping. All the SNPs
except 10 and 11 showed tight linkage (see text for further
details).

56

744

1020 1040
LRR

Fig. 25.3 The intron/exon structure of the NOD2/CARD15
gene and the two-dimensional NOD2/CARD15 protein
structure. CARD, caspase activating recruitment domain;
NBD, nucleotide binding domain; LRR, leucine-rich region.
Reproduced from Russell et al., with permission from Elsevier.

494

CHAPTER 25

93% of the mutations in NOD2/CARD15 have been
located in the LRR region and they have a diminished ability to activate nuclear factor-κβ (NF-κβ).
This suggests that NOD2/CARD15 acts to protect the
intestinal population from bacterial invasion and in
CD this protective mechanism malfunctions (Bonen
et al. 2003).
The murine NOD2/CARD15 locus has been identified and shown to function in the same way as its
human equivalent, e.g. expression is induced by
bacterial cell-wall components. A knockout mouse
model has been developed but the mice do not
develop the intestinal pathology characteristic of
CD (Pauleau & Murray 2003). Rather, the knockout
mice are more likely to survive bacterial challenge
than wildtype mice. This unexpected result shows
that the phenotype of complex traits is dependent on
the total genetic background of the host in which a
mutated allele sits.
The integration of global information about
DNA, mRNA, and protein can be used to
facilitate disease-gene identification
In the study on Crohn’s disease cited in the previous
section, the ’omics techniques were used to better
understand the biochemical basis of the disease
after the gene had been identified. However, in a
completely different approach, Mootha et al. (2003)
used the ’omics to identify the gene that is defective
in patients with a particular disease (French-Canadian
type Leigh syndrome, LSFC). At the outset it was
known that the disease is caused by a deficiency in
cytochrome oxidase even though patients do not
have mutations in genes for the structural subunits
or assembly factors. Genome-wide association studies
had shown that the gene maps to chromosome 2p1621. Using the tools of bioinformatics, 30 genes were
identified in the candidate region and there was strong
experimental evidence for 15 of them (Fig. 25.4).
However, no connection was known between any of
these 15 genes and mitochondrial biology.
Functionally related genes tend to be transcriptionally coregulated and this certainly is true in
yeast for those genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Therefore, Mootha et al. (2003) decided to
systematically identify genes that exhibited expression patterns resembling those of known mitochondrial genes. The rationale was that any gene that is
coregulated with mitochondrial genes might encode
polypeptides targeted to this organelle. An examination of the data in publicly available microarray

Chr 2p16-21
mRNA
expression
D2S2294 (68.2 cM)
ENST00000260621
D2S119 (69.0 cM)
D2S2298 (69.5 cM)

DKFZP564A033
ABCG5
ABCG8

3

LRPPRC

3

PPM1B
SLC3A1

3
3

KIAA0436

3

3

FLJ23451

D2S2174 (71.4 cM)

ENST00000272288
ENST00000272287
SIX3
ENST00000272290
SIX2

3
3

FLJ10379
D2S2291 (73.3 cM)

Fig. 25.4 Physical map of the LSFC candidate region.
Microsatellite markers and genetic distances are shown to
the left of the chromosome map. Genes with varying levels of
annotation support are shown with different colors (RefSeq
gene, blue; Ensembl gene, green; human mRNA, orange).
An additional 15 computationally predicted genes lie within
this region but are not shown. Genes represented in mRNA
expression sets are indicated with a check to the right of the
gene names. Reproduced from Mootha et al. (2003).
Copyright (2003) National Academy of Sciences, USA.

databases showed that just one of the 15 genes (LRPPRC) had an expression pattern similar to other
mitochondrial proteins.
If the LRPPRC gene product is a mitochondrial
protein then it should be found in intact mitochondria. Since nothing was known about the gene product, Mootha et al. (2003) adopted a novel proteomics
approach. They purified human mitochondria,
extracted the proteins from them, digested them with
trypsin, and analyzed them by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). All the peptides that were identified then were checked to see if they could have been
encoded by any of the 15 genes in the candidate
region. A total of 12 peptides matched with sequences
in the LRPPRC gene and no matches were found
with any other genes in the LSFC candidate region.
The above result strongly suggested that defects
in the LRPPRC gene are responsible for LSFC. To
confirm that this is indeed the case, all the LRPPRC
exons were sequenced in DNA from LSFC patients
and normal controls. With one exception, DNA from
all the patients was found to have a single base change

495

Applications of genomics

(a)

Causative SNP

Haplotype 1

Haplotype 3
Haplotype 2
Haplotype 4

Haplotype 5
Haplotype 6

Haplotype 7
(b)

Haplotype 1

Haplotype 3

Haplotype 2

Haplotype 4

Fig. 25.5 The two ways in
which a causative single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) can become
associated with a particular
haplotype. In (a) the causative SNP
arises early, whereas in (b) it arises
late. (Redrawn with permission from
Judson et al. 2000.)

Haplotype 5

Haplotype 6

in exon 9 that would cause a missense change in an
amino acid that is conserved in humans, mice, rats,
and Fugu. One patient was found to be heterozygous
for the exon 9 mutation but also was heterozygous
for a deletion in exon 35. These results provide
definitive genetic proof that LRPPRC is the gene that
is defective in LSFC and clearly show how the ’omics
can be used in gene identification.
The existence of haplotype blocks should
simplify linkage disequilibrium analysis
The pattern of SNPs in a stretch of DNA is known as
the haplotype. Figure 25.5 shows the evolution of a
number of theoretical haplotypes, some of which
include an SNP causing disease. From this figure, it
is clear that not all SNPs would be predictive of the

Haplotype 4’

Causative SNP

disease. Also, not all haplotypes are informative
and their detection in an LD association study
would complicate interpretation of the data. This
is exactly the situation encountered in the two
studies on Crohn’s disease described above. To understand haplotype structure better, Daly et al. (2001)
undertook a detailed analysis of 103 SNPs within the
500-kb region on chromosome 5q31 associated with
Crohn’s disease. Their results showed a picture of
discrete haplotype blocks of tens to hundreds of
kilobases, each with limited diversity punctuated by
apparent sites of recombination (Fig. 25.6). In a corresponding study, Johnson et al. (2001) genotyped
122 SNPs in nine genes from 384 individuals and
found a limited number of haplotypes (Fig. 25.7).
The existence of haplotype blocks should greatly
simplify LD analysis. Rather than using all the SNPs

496

CHAPTER 25

= 50 kb

SNPs

(a)

I I

GG A C A A CG

T T A CG

A A T T CG T G

CCCA A

GG A C A A CG A

I

I

I

CG CG A C CGG A Y

I I

IIII II IIII IIIII I I

II I

III IIII II

II I

I IIIIII IIIII II IIIII I III

II I II

I I I

I

I I

II

I

C CG A T

C C C T GC T T A CGG T GC A G T GGC A CG T A T T * C A

CG T T T A G

ACAACA

GT T C TGA

G A C T GG T C G

T T GC C C CGGC T

C A A CC

C TGAC

C A T C AC T CCCC AGAC T G T G S TG T T AGT A T C T

T A A T T GG

G T G A CG

T G T GCGG

T A TCA

CG C A G A CG A

C T GC T A C A A C C

GCG C T

C TGAC

T C C T A T C C A T C A T GG T CG A A T GCG T A C A T T A

TGT T * GA

GC GG T G

TG * GT AA

CGGCG

CGGC C C C A A C C

CCA CC

A T ACT

C C C CG C T T A CGG T GC A G T GGC A CG T A T T T C A

TGA T T AG

A C GG T G

Block 1 Block 2 Block 3
84 kb
3 kb
14 kb

CC A GC

II

Block 4 Block 5 Block 6
30 kb
25 kb 11 kb

Block 7
92 kb

T A T AG

Block 8 Block 9 Block 10
21 kb 27 kb
55 kb

Block 11
19 kb

(b)

96%

97%

92%

94%

93%

97%

93%

91%

92%

90%

98%

(c)

76%

77%

18%

19%

36%
26%
28%

37%
14%
19%
21%

35%
9%
13%
35%

41%
9%
29%
18%

40%
14%
27%
12%

38%
8%
31%
7%

36%
10%
33%
9%

42%
8%
36%

29%
16%
51%

(d)

.06

.40

.33

.05

.11

.05

.07

.02

.27

.24

Fig. 25.6 Block-like haplotype diversity at 5q31. (a) Common haplotype patterns in each block of low diversity. Dashed lines
indicate locations where more than 2% of all chromosomes are observed to transition from one common haplotype to a different
one. (b) Percentage of observed chromosomes that match one of the common patterns exactly. (c) Percentage of each of the
common patterns among untransmitted chromosomes. (d) Estimated rate of haplotype exchange between the block. (Reprinted
from Daly et al. 2001 by permission of Nature Publishing Group, New York.)

in a region, we can identify exactly which SNPs
will be redundant and which will be informative
in association studies. The latter are referred to as
haplotype tag SNPs (htSNPs) and they are markers
that capture the haplotype of a genomic region.
Thus, once the haplotype blocks in any given region
are identified they can be treated as alleles and
tested for LD. This not only simplifies the analysis
but it reduces the number of SNPs that need to be
genotyped. With this in mind, the US National
Institutes of Health has funded a haplotype mapping
(“HapMap”) project whose aim is to catalog the
common haplotype blocks in multiple human populations (Couzin 2002).
Although the concept of the HapMap project is
very simple, reducing it to practice may be more
complex (Cardon & Abecasis 2003). In the first detailed
genome-wide analysis of haplotype blocks, Gabriel
et al. (2002) focused on SNPs with minor allele frequencies >10% in 51 genomic regions. Their samples included individuals from a number of distinct
ethnic groups. Two significant observations were
made. First, haplotype blocks can be detected with
relatively few markers and that within each block,
three to five haplotypes can account for 90% of all
chromosomes in the population. Second, the haplotype blocks are shorter in populations of African

ancestry (average 11 kb) than in the other ethnic
groups (average 22 kb). Based on these results,
Gabriel et al. (2002) proposed that through careful
SNP selection all the common haplotypes in the
genome could be identified with no more than
300,000–1,000,000 SNPs.
The above proposal is dependent on block boundaries and haplotype diversity remaining relatively
stable as more markers are examined. However, a
study of chromosome 19 indicated that only onethird of the chromosome exhibited a block-like
structure (Phillips et al. 2003). Also, most investigations of haplotype blocks have used a small set of
SNPs that are not representative of the variants
in the population. Rather, common alleles are overrepresented and rare alleles are under-represented.
This frequency bias is unlikely to be a problem if
common diseases are caused by common variants
(Pritchard & Cox 2002) but it will limit the utility
of the method for diseases caused by rarer alleles.
Finally, the size of the haplotype blocks is influenced
by marker density: denser marker panels have
identified more short blocks whereas sparser marker
panels have identified a smaller number of blocks of
greater length. Despite these limitaions, the existence
of haplotypes undoubtedly will facilitate the identification of disease genes.

497

Applications of genomics

CFLAR
C/T A/T A/G* T/– G/T G/A
C
.
T
.

A
.
.
T

A
G
G
G

T
.
.
.

G
T
T
.

G
A
A
A

INS
A/C C/T A/T C/G C/T C/T C/A C/T G/T G/A G/A C/A C/T G/A

Freq.
46.00%
44.25%
8.75%
0.50%

CASP10
C/T C/T A/G A/G C/T G/A A/G T/A G/A G/C G/A
C
T
T
T
.
.

C
.
.
.
T
T

A
G
G
G
G
G

A
.
.
.
G
G

C
.
.
.
T
.

G
.
A
.
.
.

A
.
.
G
.
.

T
A
A
A
.
A

G
.
.
.
A
.

G
C
C
C
.
C

G
A
A
A
A
A

Freq.
44.00%
39.00%
7.00%
6.25%
1.75%
0.50%

GAD2
A/G C/T C/A A/G A/G C/A G/A A/G C/A/T T/G C/T G/C* T/A*
A
.
.
G
.
.
.
.

C
.
T
.
.
.
T
.

C
.
A
.
.
.
A
.

A
.
G
.
.
.
G
.

G
.
A
.
.
.
A
.

C
.
.
.
.
.
.
A

G
.
.
.
.
A
.
.

A
.
.
G
.
.
.
.

C
T
T
A
T
T
T
T

T
.
.
G
.
.
.
.

C
.
.
T
.
.
T
.

G
.
.
C
.
.
C
.

T
.
A
.
A
.
.
.

H19
G/C G/C G/T T/C C/T C/T A/T A/G C/G G/C G/T G/A G/A
G
C
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
.

G
.
C
.
.
.
C
.
.
.
C
C
.
.
.

G
T
.
.
T
.
.
.
.
T
.
.
.
.
.

T
C
C
.
C
.
C
C
.
C
C
C
C
.
.

C
T
T
.
T
.
T
T
.
T
T
T
T
.
.

C
.
.
.
.
T
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

A
T
T
.
T
.
T
T
.
T
T
T
T
.
.

A
G
G
.
G
.
G
G
.
G
G
G
G
.
.

C
G
G
.
G
.
.
G
G
G
.
G
G
.
G

G
C
C
.
C
.
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C

G
T
T
.
T
.
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
.
.

A
.
C
.
C
.
C
C
.

G
A
A
A
A
.
A
A
A
A
A
.
A
.
A

G
A
A
A
A
.
A
A
A
.
.
A
.
.
A

C
.
T
.
.
.
.
.
T

A
.
T
.
T
.
.
T
T

C
.
G
.
.
.
.
.
G

C
.
.
.
T
.
.
T
.

C
.
T
.
.
.
.
.
T

C
.
A
.
A
.
.
A
A

C
.
T
.
.
.
.
.
T

G
.
T
.
.
.
.
.
T

G
.
A
.
.
.
.
.
A

A
.
.
G
G
.
.
.
G
G

C
.
.
.
.
T
.
.
.
.

G
.
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
.

G
.
.
A
.
.
.
.
A
A

G
.
.
.
A
.
.
.
.
.

C
.
T
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

C
.
.
T
T
.
.
.
T
T

A
.
.
G
.
.
.
.
G
G

C
A
.
.
A
.
.
.
.

C
.
.
.
.
T
.
.
.

G
.
.
A
.
.
.
.
.

TCF8
G/A A/G C/T T/C T/C T/G C/G T/C A/G T/C A/G G/A T/C A/G
G
.
.
.
.
.
.
A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Freq.
45.00%
28.00%
12.75%
8.25%
1.75%
1.00%
0.75%
0.50%

A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
G
.
.
.

C
T
T
T
T
T
.
.
T
.
T
T
.
.
T

T
.
C
C
.
C
.
.
.
.
C
T
.
.
C

T
C
C
C
C
C
C
.
C
.
C
C
.
C
.

T
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
.
.

C
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

T
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
.
.
.

T
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
C
.
.
.

A
G
.
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
G
.
.
.

G
.
.
.
.
.
A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

T
.
.
C
.
C
.
.
.
.
C
.
.
.
.

A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.

Freq.
45.00%
20.00%
13.25%
11.25%
3.75%
3.50%
1.50%
0.50%
0.50%

Freq.
33.50%
13.75%
13.25%
8.25%
8.00%
5.25%
4.50%
3.75%
2.25%
1.75%
1.75%
1.25%
0.75%
0.75%
0.75%

Freq.
34.75%
19.00%
15.00%
10.25%
5.75%
4.50%
1.00%
1.00%
1.00%
0.50%
0.50%
0.50%
0.50%
0.50%
0.50%

CASP8
T/G T/C G/A G/T C/G* G/A G/A C/G C/T G/C A/G A/G C/A
T
.
.
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
.
G

T
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

G
A
.
.
A
A
.
A
.
.
.
A

G
.
.
.
.
.
.
T
.
.
.
T

C
.
G
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

G
A
.
.
A
A
.
.
.
.
A
.

G
A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

C
G
.
.
G
G
.
.
G
G
G
G

C
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
T
T
.
.

SDF1
G/A A/G C/T G/C G/A G/A C/T C/T A/G G/C A/T T/C +/– T/C G/A +/–* T/C* G/A C/T* T/C* C/T G/G*
G
.
.
A
.
.
.
.
A
A

G
.
.
.
A
.
.
.
.

G
.
C
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

A
.
.
T
.
.
.
.
T
T

T
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
C
C

+
.
.
.
.
.
.
–
.
.

T
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
.
C

G
.
A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

T
.
.
C
.
.
.
.
C
C

G
A
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
A

C
T
T
T
T
T
T
.
T
T

T
.
.
.
.
.
.
C
.
.

C
.
.
.
.
.
.
T
.
.

C
.
G
G
.
.
.
G
G
.

G
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
C
.
.
.

A
.
.
.
.
G
.
.
.
.
.
.

A
.
G
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

C
A
.
.
A
A
A
.
A
A
A
A

Freq.
39.00%
18.25%
12.75%
9.25%
6.50%
3.75%
2.75%
1.75%
1.75%
1.25%
1.00%
0.75%

Freq.
30.75%
17.50%
15.00%
14.25%
10.00%
5.50%
1.50%
1.50%
0.75%
0.50%

Fig. 25.7 Common European haplotypes and their haplotype tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (htSNPs) observed at nine
genes. Boxed SNPs represent the htSNPs that can capture the common haplotypes that are segregating in European populations.
Dots represent the allele that is found on the most common haplotype. Asterisks indicate SNPs described in dbSNP. (Reprinted from
Johnson et al. 2001 by permission of Nature Publishing Group, New York.)

Investigating quantitative trait loci (QTLs)
in inbred populations
Particular kinds of genetic cross are necessary
if QTLs are to be mapped
The basis of all QTL detection, regardless of the
species to which it is applied, is the identification of
association between genetically determined phenotypes and specific genetic markers. However, there

is a special problem in mapping QTLs and other
complex trait genes and that is penetrance; i.e. the
degree to which the transmission of a gene results
in the expression of a trait. For a single gene trait,
biological or environmental limitation accounts for
penetrance, but in a multigenic trait the genetic
context is important. Hence, the consequences of inheriting one gene rely heavily on the co-inheritance
of others. For this reason careful thought needs to be
given to the analysis methodology.

498

CHAPTER 25

Inbred strain ‘A’

Inbred strain ‘B’

×
F1 (or N1)
generation
[e.g. (A × B)F1]

×

F2 intercross
generation
[e.g. (A × B)F2 ]

Brother × sister mating of
randomly selected F2 pairs
for more than 20 generations

Recombinant inbred
strain (e.g. A × B-1)

Fig. 25.8

Congenic strain
(e.g. A.B-H2k b)

×

Successive backcrosses to
‘A’ selected for chromosomal
region (e.g. H2kb ), followed
by intercross

First generation backcross
(N2) to ‘A’ [e.g. (A × B)F1 × A]

Second backcross (N3) to ‘A’ followed by
brother × sister mating of randomly selected
N3 pairs for more than 20 generations

Recombinant congenic strain
(e.g. AcB-1)

Crosses used in the analysis of complex traits. (Adapted from Frankel 1995 by permission of Elsevier Science.)

In inbreeding populations, i.e. crops and laboratory
and domestic animals, the kinds of cross used to
dissect QTLs are shown in Fig. 25.8. Populations
are typically generated by crosses between inbred
strains, usually the first generation backcross (N2)
or intercross (F2). Higher generation crosses (N3),
panels of recombinant inbred lines (RIL), recombinant
congenic strains (RC), or inbred strains themselves
may also be used. The chromosomal content in these
panels is the heart of the study. They define which
alleles are inherited in individuals, so that chromosomal associations can be made, and provide genetic
recombination information so that location within a
chromosome can be deduced. F1 hybrids are genetically identical to each other but individuals in subsequent generations are not. Backcross progeny reveal
recombination events on only one homolog, the one
inherited from the F1 parent, but intercross progeny
reveal such events on both homologs. RILs and RC

strains also harbor recombinations but, unlike backcross and intercross progeny, these are homozygous
at all loci as a result of inbreeding. A congenic strain
of animal or near isogenic line (NIL) of a plant has
only one chromosomal region that distinguishes it
from one of its parents. Because they have an unchanging genotype, RILs and congenic strains/NILs offer
an elegant way of discriminating between the role
of the environment and of genetic factors in the
expression of phenotype.
Identifying QTLs involves two challenging
steps
The traditional approach for QTL analysis occurs in
two stages and both are very resource intensive. The
first step consists of a large cross between at least two
strains in which hundreds or thousands of progeny
are assayed for relevant phenotypes (Fig. 25.9) and

Applications of genomics

(a)
A1A1 × A2A2

F1 A1A2

Trait performance

P

(b)

F2 A1A1 A1A2 A2A2
A1 A 1

A1A2

A2A2

Fig. 25.9 Relationship between the performance for a
quantitative trait and genotypes at a marker locus for an
F2 interbreeding population. (a) Genetic composition of the
F2 population sampled. (b) Quantitative performance of
different types of F2 genotypes.

genotyped for polymorphic markers spanning the
genome. Because such crosses involve the simultaneous segregation of multiple QTLs only those
of large effect are likely to be detected. The second
step involves molecular identification of the genetic variants that are responsible for each QTL. This
step typically involves studying individual QTLs
in isolation by performing 5–10 generations of
backcrosses. The objective is to construct congenic
strains/NILs with chromosomal segments carrying
alternative alleles of the QTL on an otherwise isogenic background. The congenic strains/NILs then
are interbred to facilitate fine-structure mapping. A
classical example of this approach is provided by
studies on sugar content and fruit shape of tomatoes.
One of the major objectives of tomato breeding
is to increase the content of total soluble solids (TSS
or brix; mainly sugars and amino acids) in fruits to
improve taste and processing qualities. TSS in fruits
of wild tomatoes (Lycopersicon pennelli) can reach
up to 15% of the fruit’s weight, three times higher
than is seen in cultivated tomatoes (L. esculentum).
To resolve the genetic basis for this variation, a set
of 50 NILs was developed from a cross between
L. pennelli and L. esculentum. Each of the NILs contained a single RFLP-defined L. pennelli chromosome
segment and collectively they covered the genome.
Using these NILs it was possible to identify 23 QTLs
that increase brix (i.e. polygenic inheritance controls
brix). One of these QTLs (Brix9-2-5) was located on a
particular NIL that was defined by a 9 cM segment
on chromosome 9. When plants of L. esculentum, the
NIL homozygous for the L. pennelli allele of Brix9-2-5
and their F1 hybrids were compared over a three-

499

year period, the only trait associated with the NIL
was brix (Fridman et al. 2000).
To map the Brix9-2-5 QTL, 7000 F2 progeny of
the NIL hybrid (Fig. 25.10) were subjected to RFLP
analysis with two markers (CP44 and TG225) and
this identified 145 recombinants. Of these recombinants, 28 were localized to the region between the
two ends of BAC91A4 and they could be subdivided
into six recombination groups. When the brix content of the recombination groups was tested the
Brix9-2-5 QTL was found to be associated with an
18 kb segment of the chromosome. This 18-kb region was sequenced and various primer pairs used
to amplify different regions. One of these amplicons,
about 1 kb in length, was found to cosegregate with
the QTL. Further mapping reduced the QTL to a 484 bp
region of chromosome 9 and sequence analysis
identified this as part of an invertase expressed exclusively in flowers and fruits of tomatoes. Initially the
biochemical changes resulting from the Brix9-2-5
allele were not clear but an extension of the QTL
analysis to five different tomato species localized
the polymorphism to an amino acid change near the
catalytic site (Fridman et al. 2004).
Two key morphological changes that accompanied tomato domestication were fruit size and shape.
Wild tomatoes (L. pennelli) have small (~2 g), round
berries whereas commercial cultivars have fruit
weighing 50–1000 g that comes in a variety of
shapes (round, oval, pear-shaped, etc). Genetic crosses
between wild and cultivated tomatoes, like those
described above, have shown that most of the variation in size and shape is due to fewer than 30 QTLs.
One of the key QTLs, fw2.2, accounts for about 30%
of the variance in fruit weight and was the first plant
QTL to be mapped and cloned (Alpert & Tanksley
1996). The fw2.2 polymorphism has been localized
to a gene encoding a 22 kD protein (ORFX) with similarities to a human oncogene (Frary et al. 2000).
Comparative sequencing of fw2.2 alleles suggested
that the modulation of fruit size was attributable to
5′ regulatory variation among the alleles rather
than to differences in the structural protein. Further
support for this idea was provided by an analysis of
transcription in NILs (Cong et al. 2002). Large- and
small-fruited tomatoes differed in peak transcript
levels by one week and this was associated with
changes in mitotic activity in the early stages of fruit
development. Finally, an artificial gene-dosage series
was constructed by generating transgenic plants
with 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 copies of the small-fruited allele
of fw2.2 (Liu et al. 2003). Analysis of a variety of

(a)

7000 Progeny

TG225

TG225

CP44

CP44

F1 Hybrids

Recombinant

Self-cross

TG225

CP44

(b)
TG225

CP44
Chromosome 9

m

m

m

m

m

m

m
BAC91A4

Number of
recombinants

Brix
value

7

–6

2

+20

3

–4

1

+24

4

+2

11

+17

Brix9-2-5

Fig. 25.10 Mapping of the Brix9-2-5 locus. (a) F1 hybrids are self-crossed and the 7000 progeny tested with RFLP markers
CP44 and TG225 to detect those in which recombination has occurred in the region derived from L. pennelli (shown in blue).
The recombinants are crossed and selection made for homozygous recombinants. (b) The 28 recombinants where crossing over
occurred within the region present in BAC91A4 were subjected to fine-scale mapping to identify the crossover more precisely and
were tested for brix content.

501

Applications of genomics

Table 25.1

Plant
Arabidopsis
Arabidopsis
Rice
Rice
Rice
Maize
Maize
Tomato
Tomato
Tomato

Cloned QTLs in plants (adapted from Paran & Zamir 2003).

QTL

Phenotype

Gene

Variation

EDI
PHYA
Hd1
Hd6
Hd3a
tb1
Dwarf8
Brix9-2-5
fw2.2
Ovate

Flowering time
Hypocotyl elongation
Flowering time
Flowering time
Flowering time
Plant architecture
Flowering time
Sugar content
Fruit weight
Fruit shape

Cryptochrome photoreceptor
Phytochrome A
Transcription factor
Protein kinase
FLOWERING LOCUS T
Transcription factor
Transcription factor
Invertase
Regulatory gene
Regulatory gene

Altered protein function
Altered protein function
Loss of function
Loss of function
Unknown
Expression level
Unknown
Altered protein function
Expression level
Loss of function

agronomic factors showed a clear correlation
between fruit size and gene dosage and that fw2.2
controls fruit growth in a tissue-specific manner.
Various factors influence the ability to
isolate QTLs
At the time of going to press only a very limited
number of QTLs had been mapped and sequenced,
and Table 25.1 shows the list for plants. Examples
from the animal world are given by Glazier et al.
(2002). In the tomato examples described above,
isolation was greatly facilitated by the fact that the
selected QTL had a major effect. If the traits being
studied were due to a number of combinations of
several genes, each of much smaller effect, then analysis would have been much more difficult. Another
factor that governs the success of searches for QTLs
is the availability of physical markers. Fine-scale
mapping was a key part of the identification of the
tomato QTLs and such mapping would not be possible without markers such as SNPs, RFLPs, etc.
Fortunately, genome mapping and sequencing
projects are in progress for a significant number of crop
and domestic animal species (Box 25.4). Finally,
from the details of the isolation of the Brix9-2-5 QTL
presented above it should be clear that finding QTLs
puts a heavy demand on resources. One way of minimizing this problem is to use chromosome substitution strains (Singer et al. 2004).
Chromosome substitution strains make
the identification of QTLs easier
Chromosome substitution strains (CSSs) are produced
as panels from crosses between a donor strain (A)

and a host strain (B) such that strain CSS-i carries
both copies of chromosome i from the donor strain
but all other chromosomes from the host. Thus, for an
organism with four chromosomes the panel would
consist of: 1a1a2b2b3b3b4b4b, 1b1b2a2a3b3b4b4b,
1b1b2b2b3a3a4b4b, 1b1b2b2b3b3b4a4a. There is a significant difference between CSSs and congenic strains/
NILs. The former have an entire chromosome substitution whereas the latter have only a portion of the
chromosome substituted.
Construction of CSS panels is conceptually simple
and occurs in two steps. In the first, AB F1 hybrids are
repeatedly backcrossed to the host strain (B) and at
each cycle selection is made for progeny carrying a
non-recombinant copy of the desired chromosome.
Once strains are identified that are heterosomic (A/B)
for the desired chromosome on an otherwise isogenic host (B/B) background they are intercrossed to
produce progeny homosomic for A/A. In practice,
constructing the panel is dependent on detailed
physical maps and in the case of the mouse took
seven years and involved analysis of 17,000 mice
(Singer et al. 2004). However, once constructed, a
CSS panel is a valuable resource for studying the
genetic control of phenotypic variation.
The CSS mouse panel of Singer et al. (2004) consists of 22 strains, one for each of the 19 autosomes,
the two sex chromosomes, and the mitochondria.
This panel of strains was compared with the host
and donor strains in terms of sterol levels, amino acid
levels, diet-induced obesity, and anxiety. A difference
in any of these parameters between the host and
donor strains that is seen in one or more of the CSS
strains is probably due to a QTL. Overall, evidence
was found for 150 QTLs. More convincing proof
of the existence of particular QTLs would be their

502

CHAPTER 25

Box 25.4 Internet resources for domestic animal and
crop plant genome projects
The following websites provide current
information on the progress of mapping and
sequencing the genomes of a variety of
domesticated species. Many of the sites also
provide links to further resources, including
gene mutation and sequence databases and
functional analysis tools.
Domestic animals
A useful overview is the document
“Coordination of Programs on Domestic
Animal Genomics: the Federal Framework”
which can be found at
www.csrees.usda.gov/nea/animals/pdfs/
nstc_progress_rpt.pdf
Dog
http://mendel.berkeley.edu/dog.html Dog
Genome Project (University of California,
Berkeley, University of Oregon, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center)

Horse
http://www.vgl.ucdavis.edu/~lvmillon/
Veterinary Genetics Laboratory, UC Davis
Chicken
http://www.ri.bbsrc.ac.uk/chickmap/
ChickMapHomePage.html ChickMaP
project, Roslin Institute
http://poultry.mph.msu.edu/ US Poultry
Genome Project, Michigan State
University
Crop plants
A useful overview of plant genome databases
can be found at www.cbi.pku.edu.cn/
mirror/GenomeWeb/plant-gen-db.html
Cotton
http://algodon.tamu.edu/htdocscotton/cottondb.html USDA Agricultural
research center

Cow
http://www.marc.usda.gov/genome/cattle/
cattle.html Meat Animal Research Center
Pig
http://www.marc.usda.gov/genome/swine/
swine.html Meat Animal Research Center
http://www.projects.roslin.ac.uk/pigmap/
pigmap.html Pig genome resources at the
Roslin Institute, including links to the
PigMAP linkage map and PIGBASE pig
genome database
Sheep
http://www.marc.usda.gov/genome/sheep/
sheep.html Meat Animal Research Center
http://www.projects.roslin.ac.uk/sheepmap/
front.html UK Sheep Genome Mapping
Project, Roslin Institute

Sorghum
http://algodon.tamu.edu/sorghumdb.html
USDA Agricultural research center
Barley
http://ukcrop.net/barley.html Scottish Crop
Research Institute
Maize
http://www.agron.missouri.edu/
Comprehensive maize genomics and
functional genomics database
Wheat and oats
http://ars-genome.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/
WebAce/webace?db=graingenes

Applications of genomics

mapping to specific locations on the implicated
chromosome(s). When eight of the putative 150 QTLs
were analyzed further it was possible to map them to
the substituted chromosome and three of them were
located close to known QTLs of similar phenotype.
In an extension of this work, Krewson et al. (2004)
noted that the onset of puberty in mice occurred
earlier in the donor strain than in the host strain.
Using the CSS panel, this phenotype was linked to
chromosomes 6 and 13. When the CSS-6 and CSS13 strains were crossed with the host strain, the F1
generation had a timing of puberty onset that was
intermediate between the two parents.
The attraction of the CSS mouse panel is that one
can use it to identify different QTLs associated with
a particular phenotype, e.g. anxiety, and then use
the well-tried methods to identify the causative
genes. Once these genes have been characterized in
the mouse they can be used to probe the human
sequence for orthologs. Once the human orthologs
have been identified, patient pools can be screened
for the presence of SNPs. That is, inbred mouse
strains can be used to identify disease genes in outbreeding human populations. Similarly, other quantitative traits could be mapped in the mouse and used
to identify orthologs in domestic animals.
The level of gene expression can influence the
phenotype of a QTL
Reference to Table 25.1 shows that mutations in
coding regions that result in alterations in protein
function are responsible for some QTLs. However,
other QTLs arise from changes in gene expression.
Generally speaking, it is much more difficult to identify such changes because they occur in DNA regions
outside the coding region and sometimes at some
distance from it. Furthermore, little is known about
how variation in DNA sequences might affect the
baseline level of gene expression among individuals.
The first attempt at quantifying this variation has
been undertaken by Morley et al. (2004). Using
microarrays, they ascertained the baseline expression level of ~8500 active genes in immortalized
cells from 14 CEPH families (see p. 362). Then they
focused on a subset of genes (~3500) with more
variation in expression level between unrelated individuals than between replicate samples within individuals. Attempts then were made to link these genes
to chromosomal locations and significant linkage
was found for 984 of them. Both cis- and trans-acting
loci were identified although most operate in trans.

503

The significance of the work of Morley et al. (2004)
is that the level of gene expression is a trait like many
others and now is amenable to genetic analysis.
Analyzing typical quantitative traits in humans
(e.g. blood pressure, levels of serum metabolites) has
proved extremely difficult in the past but dissecting
the genetic contribution now should be possible.

Understanding responses to drugs
(pharmacogenomics)
The perfect therapeutic drug is one that effectively
treats a disease and is free of unwanted side-effects.
Over the past 25 years many important new classes
of drugs have been launched. However, even the
most successful and effective of these provide optimal
therapy only to a subset of those treated. Some individuals with a particular disease may receive little or
no benefit from a drug while others may experience
drug-related adverse effects. Such individual variations in response to a drug are responsible for the
high failure rates of new drug candidates at the
clinical trials stage.
Pharmacogenomics is the study of the association
between genomic, genetic, and proteomic data on the
one hand and drug response patterns on the other.
The objective is to explain inter-patient variability in
drug response and to predict the likely response in
individuals receiving a particular medicine. As such,
pharmacogenomics has the potential to influence
the way approved medicines are used as well as have
an impact on how clinical trials are designed and
interpreted during the drug development process.
Relevant information may be derived during the
clinical trial recruitment phase, following the treatment phase, or both.
Genetic variation accounts for the different
responses of individuals to drugs
There are two fundamental causes of individual
responses to drugs. The first of these is variation in
the structure of the target molecule. If a drug acts by
blocking a particular receptor then it may be that the
receptor is not identical in all individuals. A good
example is the variation observed in the response of
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
to all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). Some patients who
contract APL do so because of a balanced translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17 that results
in the formation of a chimeric PML-RARα receptor

504

CHAPTER 25

Therapeutic/toxic response

gene. Other patients have a translocation between
chromosomes 11 and 17 that results in the formation of a chimeric PLZF-RARα receptor. These
chimeras are believed to cause APL by interference
with RAR function. Clearly, the RAR receptor is
different in the two types of APL and this is reflected
in the fact that only the first type responds to ATRA
(He et al. 1998).
Another good example of receptor variation is the
polymorphism exhibited by the β2-adrenergic receptor. Nine naturally occurring polymorphisms have
been identified in the coding region of the receptor
and one of these (Arg16Gly) has been well studied.
Asthmatic patients who are homozygous for the
Arg16 form of the receptor are 5.3 times more likely
to respond to albuterol (salbutamol) than those who
are homozygous for the Gly16 form. Heterozygotes
give an intermediate response, being 2.3 times more
likely to respond than Gly16 homozygotes (Martinez
et al. 1997). Also of interest is the ethnic variation
in frequency of this polymorphism: in Caucasians,
Asians, and those of Afro-Caribbean origin it is 0.61,
0.40, and 0.50, respectively.
The second cause of variation in drug response is
differences in pharmacokinetics: differences in the
way that a particular drug is adsorbed, distributed,
metabolized, and excreted (ADME) by the body. A
drug that is not absorbed or that is metabolized too
quickly will not be effective. On the other hand, a
drug that is poorly metabolized could accumulate
and cause adverse effects (Fig. 25.11). Obviously,
variations in ADME can have multiple causes and
the best studied are polymorphisms in drug transport and drug metabolism.
An important polymorphism associated with drug
transport is a variant in the multidrug-resistance
gene MDR-1. The product of this gene is an ATP-

Therapeutic
window
Therapeutic
response
Toxicity

Low/fast Normal/normal

High/slow

dependent membrane efflux pump whose function
is the export of substances from the cell, presumably
to prevent accumulation of toxic substances or
metabolites. A mutation in exon 26 of the MDR-1
gene (C3435T) correlated with alterations in plasma
levels of certain drugs. For example, individuals
homozygous for this variant exhibited fourfold higher
plasma levels of digoxin after a single oral dose and
an increased maximum concentration on chronic
dosage (Hoffmeyer et al. 2000). Other substrates
for this transporter are a number of important drugs
that have a narrow therapeutic window; i.e. there
is little difference between the drug concentration
that gives the desired effect and that which is toxic.
Therefore, this polymorphism could have a major
impact on the requirement for individual dose
adjustments for carriers of this mutation. In this
context it should be noted that the mutation is probably very common, given that 40% of the German
population are homozygous for it.
Most drugs are altered before excretion, either by
modification of functional groups or by conjugation
with molecules that enhance water solubility (e.g.
sugars). Most functional group modifications are
mediated by the cytochrome P450 group of enzymes
and the genes that encode them are highly polymorphic (for review see Ingelman-Sundberg et al. 1999).
Over 70 allelic variants of the CYP2D6 locus have
been described and, of these, at least 15 encode
non-functional gene products. Phenotypically, four
different types can be recognized (Table 25.2). The
significance of these phenotypes is illustrated by the
response of patients to the drug nortriptyline. Most
patients require 75–150 mg per day in order to reach
a steady-state plasma concentration of 50–150 µg
per liter. However, poor metabolizers need only
10–20 mg per day, whereas ultrarapid metabolizers
need 300–500 mg per day. If the genotype or phenotype of the patient is not known then there is
a significant risk of overdosing and toxicity (poor
metabolizers) or underdosing (ultrarapid metabolizers). The polymorphism of the CYP2D6 locus is
particularly important because it is implicated in
the metabolism of over 100 drugs in addition to
nortriptyline.
Pharmacogenomics is being used by the
pharmaceutical industry

Plasma drug concentration/metabolic status

Fig. 25.11 Plasma drug concentrations in different patients
after receiving the same doses of a drug metabolized by a
polymorphic enzyme.

The pharmaceutical industry is using genomics in
two ways (Roses 2004). First, it is using genomics at
an early stage in clinical trials to differentiate those

505

Applications of genomics

Table 25.2 The four drug metabolism phenotypes.

Phenotype

Frequency (%)

Extensive metabolizers
Intermediate metabolizers

75–85
10–15

Poor metabolizers

Both gene copies encode an enzyme with lower
activity than normal
Homozygous for two low-activity or nonfunctional alleles
Amplification of the CYP2D6 locus

5–10

Ultrarapid metabolizers

2–7

individuals who respond well to a drug from those
who do not respond. This information then can
be used to select responders for later clinical trials.
This is known as “efficacy pharmacogenomics”. The
second application is known as “safety pharmacogenomics”. This involves identifying unique markers
associated with adverse effects and then managing
subsequent risk.
Roses (2004) has provided a good example of a
clinical trial where efficacy pharmacogenomics is
being used for patient selection. The drug in question is an anti-obesity drug. In early clinical trials

10

Cause

1-1

patients receiving the drug fell into three classes:
non-responders, responders, and hyper-responders
(Fig. 25.12). Analysis of the literature suggested 21
genes that might be responsible for the observed
effect. Consequently, all the patients were screened
for 112 SNPs associated with these 21 genes. One
SNP was identified where non-responders were
homozygous for one allele and hyper-responders
were homozygous for the other allele. As expected,
“normal” responders were heterozygous for the alternative alleles. A larger clinical trial is underway to
determine if it is possible to exclude non-responders
2-2

1-2

Placebo, n = 41

9

Drug, n = 40

Number of subjects

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
6

5

4

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3

−4

−5

−6

−7

−8

−9

−10

Percentage weight change

Fig. 25.12 Efficacy pharmacogenetics for an obesity drug. The graph illustrates the results of a small double-blind Phase-IIA
efficacy clinical trial of a molecule intended for the treatment of obesity. Weight change in the 40 drug-treated patients (purple
line) is compared with 41 placebo-treated patients (blue line) during the two-month double-blind trial. There is an obvious
hyper-responder subgroup in the treated patients, with patients losing as much as 9% weight during the trial. Two SNPs from
two candidate genes that are related to the proposed mechanism of action of this molecule, and one SNP from another candidate
gene that is thought to be implicated in theories of obesity, segregated with the hyper-responders. Each hyper-responder was
homozygous for a single allele (labeled 2-2; light-shaded section of the graph) with patients on the left side of the curves being more
likely to be 1-1 homozygous (dark purple section). Heterozygous patients (1-2, light purple section) clustered in the middle. In this
experiment, treated patients with the 2-2 genotype for any of the three SNPs on average lost ~3.3 kg, whereas treated patients
with the 1-1 genotype gained an average of ~1.3 kg. This pattern reassures us that the molecule has efficacy and that subsequent
Phase-IIB trials might be enriched by using only patients who are 1-2 heterozygous and 2-2 homozygous, with the exclusion of
1-1 homozygous patients. In addition, although the 1-1 subgroup might be less responsive to this specific treatment, this subgroup
could be used in clinical trials of other obesity-drug candidates, which might subsequently allow a drug to be developed that is
complementary to the first. n, total number of patients in study group. Reproduced from Roses et al., with permission from Nature.

506

CHAPTER 25

All patients with the same diagnosis

1

3
2

Genetic profile for
toxicity with usual
dose of drug A

Genetic profile for
favorable response
to drugs A and B

Genetic profile for
favorable response
to drugs C and D

Treat with lower dose
of drug A or alternative drug

from trials on the basis of their SNP profile. If so, it
will reduce the cost of future clinical trials.
The occurrence of adverse effects to drugs is a
major problem for pharmaceutical companies. If the
frequency of adverse effects is high then they will be
detected at an early stage in clinical development.
More often, the frequency is low and significant
adverse effects are not seen until post-launch, when
tens of thousands of patients have been treated.
Serious adverse effects might lead to product withdrawal and hence the accurate identification of individuals at risk would be invaluable. Roses (2004)
has calculated that haplotype mapping of as few as
10–20 individuals exhibiting adverse effects (safety
pharmacogenomics) could enable “risk” genes to be
identified.
Personalized medicine involves matching
genotypes to therapy
From the material presented in the early part of the
chapter it should be clear that we are beginning to
understand the genetic and biochemical causes of
common but complex diseases. Initially, this will
lead to better classification of the different subtypes of
a disease and hence to better diagnoses. This in turn
will facilitate selection of the most appropriate therapies. Later, when we know the exact cause of each
disease, we should be able to develop drugs that will
treat the cause rather than the symptoms as we do
at present. Ultimately, genetic analysis of affected
individuals will suggest what drugs could be used to

Fig. 25.13 Pharmacogenomics has
the potential to subdivide a population of
patients with the same empiric diagnosis
(e.g. hypertension) into subgroups that
have inherited differences in their
metabolism of and/or sensitivity to
particular drugs. One subset of the
population might be at substantially greater
risk of serious toxicity (1), whereas other
subsets may have receptor polymorphisms
or disease pathogenesis polymorphisms that
make them more responsive to different
treatment options (2 vs. 3).

treat the disease and a second, pharmacogenomic
analysis will determine which drugs should be used
(Fig. 25.13).
A different way of using pharmacogenomic data
has been suggested by a study on the chemosensitivity of different cancer cell lines. Staunton et al. (2001)
used oligonucleotide chips to study the expression
levels of 6817 genes in a panel of 60 human cancer
cell lines for which the chemosensitivity profiles had
been determined. Their objective was to determine
if the gene-expression signatures of untreated cells
were sufficient for the prediction of chemosensitivity.
Gene-expression-based classifiers of sensitivity or
resistance for 232 compounds were generated and
in independent tests were found to be predictive for
88 of the compounds, irrespective of the tissue of
origin of the cells. These results could open the door
to the development of more effective chemotherapy
regimes for cancer patients.

Suggested reading
Glazier A.M., Nadeau J.H. & Altman T.J. (2002) Finding
genes that underlie complex traits. Science 298,
2345–9.
This review provides an excellent introduction to the material covered in this chapter.
Russell R.K., Nimmo E.R. & Satsangi J. (2004) Molecular genetics of Crohn’s disease. Current Opinion in
Genetics and Development 14, 264–70.
This paper presents a more detailed account of the material
presented on Crohn’s disease in this chapter.

Applications of genomics

Paran I. & Zamir D. (2003) Quantitative traits in plants:
beyond the QTL. Trends in Genetics 19, 303–6.
This short review describes not only the tomato work
described in this chapter but the excellent work done on
understanding the evolution of maize.
Barton N.H. & Keightley P.D. (2002) Understanding
quantitative genetic variation. Nature Reviews Genetics 3, 11–21.
Flint J., Vladar W., Shifman S. & Mott R. (2005)
Strategies for mapping and cloning quantitative trait
genes in rodents. Nature Reviews Genetics 6, 271–86.
Two excellent reviews that describe in detail the work done
in a number of classical model systems.
Singer J.B., Hill A.E., Burrage L.C., et al. (2004) Genetic
dissection of complex traits with chromosome substitution strains of mice. Science 304, 445–8.

507

Like many papers from Eric Lander and his group, this one is
destined to become a classic.
Morley M., Moloney C.M., Weber T.M., et al. (2004)
Genetic analysis of genome-wide variation in human
gene expression. Nature 430, 743–7.
This is another paper that is destined to become a classic.
Roses A.D. (2004) Pharmacogenetics and drug development: the path to safer and more effective drugs.
Nature Reviews Genetics 5, 645–56.
This excellent review is just one of a number of reviews on
pharmacogenomics that appeared in the September 2004
issue of Nature Reviews Genetics.
Crawford D.C. & Nickerson D.A. (2005) Definition and
clinical importance of haplotypes. Annual Review of
Medicine 56, 303–20.

CHAPTER 26
Applications of recombinant DNA technology

Introduction
Living organisms have been used by man since the
dawn of history – animals and plants are used for
food, to provide fiber and building materials, as a
source of dyes and other chemicals, and as a source
of drugs. Until the 1980s, only natural diversity
could be explored although selective breeding and
deliberate mutation allowed new strains of microbes
and new varieties of plants and animals to be developed with improved traits. Recombinant DNA technology brought about a complete revolution in the
way living organisms are exploited. By transferring
new DNA sequences into microbes, plants, and animals, or by removing or altering DNA sequences in
the endogenous genome, completely new strains or
varieties can be created to perform specific tasks.
The first example of this approach with a real practical application was the transformation of E. coli
with the gene for human insulin and the production
of recombinant insulin in cultured bacteria. Since
then, over 100 human proteins with medical applications have been expressed in bacteria, and the
technology has been extended to yeast, filamentous
fungi, animal and plant cells, and transgenic animals
and plants. Similarly, proteins derived from human
and animal pathogens have been expressed in various host species to provide a reliable source of safe
vaccines. However, the production of recombinant
proteins is only one example of how gene transfer to
microbes, animals, and plants can be used to generate useful products. In other contexts, it is not the
protein product of the transgene that is of interest,
but the metabolic impact of that protein. Genes can
be introduced that extend, curtail, or deviate existing
metabolic pathways and direct flux toward particular
small molecules, or novel genes can be introduced
to create completely new metabolic pathways. This
allows bacteria, plants and animal cells to produce
novel chemical compounds, drugs, vitamins, specific
fats and oils, and even plastics.
In other cases, the aim of genetic engineering is

not to produce a valuable substance, protein or otherwise, but to alter the phenotypic properties of the
host in some important way. Examples include fish
expressing growth hormone to make them grow
faster, and crop plants expressing proteins which
confer resistance to pests and diseases, tolerance of
harsh environments, or improved nutritional composition. While there have been advances in the
production of farm animals with improved traits,
plant biotechnology has seen the greatest benefits
and genetically modified crops are now grown on
75,000,000 hectares of land around the world.
Trait modification through germline manipulation
is practiced in animals and plants, but the same technology can be applied to humans in a more limited
sense to prevent or cure diseases. This field of medicine,
known as gene medicine, includes the concepts of
DNA vaccines, using gene transfer to kill cancer cells,
and introducing DNA into specific cells to repair
or compensate for genetic defects. In the converse
approach, animal genomes may be deliberately
mutated by gene-transfer techniques to recreate
the mutations seen in human inherited diseases or
develop disease models that can be used to investigate how diseases occur and test novel drugs.
A comprehensive survey of all the applications of
gene manipulation would take several further books
(Fig. 26.1). Therefore, in this last chapter we select
three topics of interest which show how the technology of gene manipulation can be applied and what
benefits can be gained from the genetic modification
of microbes, animals, and plants.

Theme 1: Producing useful molecules
Recombinant therapeutic proteins are
produced commercially in bacteria, yeast,
and mammalian cells
One of the earliest commercial applications of
gene manipulation was the production of human

509

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

Transgenic
animals

Nucleic
acids

Therapeutic proteins

Antisense

Improved farm
animals

Gene therapy/repair
Diagnostic probes

‘Pharming’

Disease models

Vaccines
Recombinant
DNA
technology

Vaccines

Vaccines

Small molecules

Small molecules

Therapeutic proteins

Therapeutic proteins

Improved plants

Enzymes
Biopolymers

Transgenic
plants

Fig. 26.1

Recombinant
microbes

The different ways that recombinant DNA technology has been exploited.

therapeutic proteins in bacteria. Not surprisingly,
the first such products were recombinant versions
of proteins already used as therapeutics: human
growth hormone and insulin. Prior to the advent
of genetic engineering, human growth hormone
was obtained from pituitary glands removed from
cadavers. Not only did this limit the supply of the
hormone but in some cases resulted in recipients
contracting Creutzfeld–Jacob syndrome. The recombinant approach resulted in unlimited supplies of
safe material. This safety aspect has been extended
to various blood components, anticoagulants, and
growth factors that were originally isolated from
blood but now carry the risk of HIV infection. As the
methods for cloning genes became more and more
sophisticated an increasing number of cytokines,
inerferons, and interleukins have been identified and
produced in bacteria (Table 26.1).
The first generation of protein drugs were exact
copies of the human molecules but protein engineering now is being used to develop second-generation
molecules with improved properties, e.g. by replacing certain amino acids or removing particular
protein domains. Many of the proteins listed in
Table 26.1 are modified in this manner to improve

efficacy or longevity when administered by injection.
Another trend is the increasing production of novel
therapeutics combining parts of different proteins.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the production of antibody-based drugs, which often combine
the binding specificity of antibodies with the activity
of other proteins such as cytokines and lymphokines
to achieve therapeutic effects on particular target
cells.
The early commercial recombinant proteins are
typical of protein therapeutics produced in E. coli
in that they are relatively simple aglycosylated proteins which accumulate as inclusion bodies within
the bacterial cell and must be subjected to in vitro
denaturation and refolding. Because of the importance of glycosylation, the addition of sugar chains
to proteins during their synthesis, the E. coli system
has been superseded in many cases by mammalian
cells because the latter can produce more complex
proteins and achieve correct folding and glycosylation in vivo (Wurm 2004). However, E. coli is much
cheaper to cultivate than mammalian cells and more
recent advances such as low-gene-dosage systems
which facilitate the expression of soluble proteins
(Simmons et al. 1996), and targeting systems which

Revasc (anticoagulant; recombinant hirudin produced in
S. cerevisiae)

Hirudin
Refludan (anticoagulant; recombinant hirudin produced in
S. cerevisiae)

Activase (alteplase, rh tPA produced in CHO cells)

Recombinant anticoagulants
Tissue plasminogen activator
Tenecteplase (also marketed as Metalyse)
(TNK-tPA, modified r tPA produced in CHO cells)
TNKase (tenecteplase; modified r tPA produced in CHO cells;
see Tenecteplase entry above)
Ecokinase (reteplase, r tPA; differs from human tPA in that 3 of
its 5 domains have been deleted. Produced in E. coli)
Rapilysin (reteplase, r tPA; see Ecokinase)
Retavase (reteplase, r tPA; see Ecokinase)

Other blood factors
NovoSeven (rh Factor VIIa produced in BHK cells)
Benefix (rh Factor IX produced in CHO cells)

Recombinant blood factors
Factor VIII
Helixate NexGen (octocog alfa;
rh Factor VIII produced in BHK cells)
ReFacto (moroctocog-alfa; B-domain-deleted rh Factor VIII
produced in CHO cells)
Kogenate (rh Factor VIII produced in BHK cells. Also sold as
Helixate by Aventis Behring through a license agreement)
Bioclate (rh Factor VIII produced in CHO cells)
Recombinate (rh Factor VIII produced in an animal cell line)

Product

Acute myocardial infarction
Acute myocardial infarction
Acute myocardial infarction

Galenus Mannheim
Roche
Boehringer Mannheim/
Centocor
Genentech

Aventis

Hoechst Marion Roussel/
Behringwerke AG

Myocardial infarction

Genentech

Anticoagulation therapy for
heparin-associated
thrombocytopenia
Prevention of venous
thrombosis

Acute myocardial infarction

Myocardial infarction

Some forms of hemophilia
Hemophilia B

Boehringer Ingelheim

Novo Nordisk
Genetics Institute

Hemophilia A
Hemophilia A

1997 (EU)

1997 (EU), 1998 (US)

1987 (US)

1996 (EU)
1996 (US)

1996 (EU)

2000 (US)

2001 (EU)

1996 (EU), 1999 (US)
1997 (US, EU)

1993 (US)
1992 (US)

1993 (US), 2000 (EU)

Hemophilia A

Aventis Behring
Baxter Healthcare/
Genetics Institute

1999 (EU), 2000 (US)

Hemophilia A

2000 (EU)

Date approved

Genetics Institute/Wyeth
Europa
Bayer

Therapeutic indication

Hemophilia A

Company

Bayer

Table 26.1 Biopharmaceuticals approved in the United States and Europe.

510
CHAPTER 26

Serono Laboratories
Pharmacia & Upjohn
Novo Nordisk

Savient Pharmaceuticals
Genentech

Saizen (r hGH)
Genotropin (r hGH produced in E. coli)
Norditropin (r hGH)

BioTropin (r hGH)
Nutropin (r hGH produced in E. coli)

Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus

Novo Nordisk
Eli Lilly
Hoechst AG
Eli Lilly
Novo Nordisk
Eli Lilly

Serono Laboratories

Diabetes mellitus

Aventis

Serostim (r hGH)

Diabetes mellitus

Aventis

Growth failure/Turner’s
Syndrome
Treatment of AIDS-associated
catabolism/wasting
hGH deficiency in children
hGH deficiency in children
Treatment of growth failure in
children due to inadequate
growth hormone secretion
hGH deficiency in children
hGH deficiency in children

Diabetes mellitus

Novo Nordisk

Schwartz Pharma

Diabetes mellitus

Novo Nordisk

Treatment of acromegaly

Diabetes mellitus

Novo Nordisk

Pfizer

Diabetes mellitus

Novo Nordisk

Human growth hormone
Somavert (pegvisomant; hGH analog (antagonist) produced
in E. coli)
Nutropin AQ (rh GH produced in E. coli )

Recombinant hormones
Insulin
Actrapid/Velosulin/Monotard/Insulatard/Protaphane/
Mixtard/Actraphane/Ultratard (all contain rhInsulin
produced in S. cerevisiae formulated as short/
intermediate/long acting product)
Novolog (insulin aspart, short-acting rh insulin analog
produced in S. cerevisiae).
Novolog mix 70/30 (contains insulin aspart, short-acting
rhInsulin analog as one ingredient (see also Novomix 30))
Novomix 30 (contains insulin aspart, short-acting rh insulin
analog as one ingredient)
Lantus (insulin glargine, long-acting rh insulin analog
produced in E. coli)
Optisulin (insulin glargine, long-acting rh insulin analog
produced in E. coli, see Lantus)
NovoRapid (insulin aspart, rh insulin analog)
Liprolog (Bio Lysprol, an insulin analog produced in E. coli)
Insuman (rh insulin produced in E. coli)
Humalog (insulin lispro, an insulin analog produced in E. coli)
Novolin (rh insulin)
Humulin (rh insulin produced in E. coli)

1995 (US)
1994 (US)

1996 (US)
1995 (US)
1995 (US)

1996 (US)

1994 (US), 2001 (EU)

2003 (US), 2002 (EU)

1999 (EU)
1997 (EU)
1997 (EU)
1996 (US, EU)
1991 (US)
1982 (US)

2000 (EU)

2000 (EU US)

2000 (EU)

2001 (US)

2001 (US)

2002 (EU)

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

511

Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor
Neulasta (pegfilgrastim, r pegylated GM-CSF (filgrastim).
Also marketed in EU as Neupopeg)

Recombinant hematopoietic growth factors
Erythropoietin
Aranesp (darbepoetin alfa; long acting r EPO analog produced
in CHO cells)
Nespo (darbepoetin alfa; see also Aranesp; long acting r EPO
analog produced in CHO cells)
Neorecormon (rh EPO produced in CHO cells)
Procrit (rh EPO produced in a mammalian cell line)
Epogen (rh EPO produced in a mammalian cell line)

Luveris (lutropin alfa; rh luteinizing hormone produced in
CHO cells)
Forcaltonin (r salmon calcitonin produced in E. coli)
Glucagen (rh glucagon produced in S. cerevisiae)

Forteo (teriparatide; recombinant shortened human
parathyroid hormone produced in E. coli)
Ovitrelle also termed Ovidrelle (rh choriogonadotrophin
produced in CHO cells)
Thyrogen (thyrotrophin-a, rh TSH produced in CHO cells)

Other hormones
Forsteo (recombinant human parathyroid hormone produced
in E. coli)

Follicle-stimulating hormone
Follistim (follitropin-b, rh FSH produced in CHO cells)
Puregon (rh FSH produced in CHO cells)
Gonal F (rh FSH produced in CHO cells)

Humatrope (r hGH produced in E. coli)
Protropin (r hGH, differs from hGH only by containing an
additional N-terminal methionine residue. Produced in E. coli)

Product

Table 26.1 (cont’d)

Paget disease
Hypoglycemia

Unigene
Novo Nordisk

Treatment of anemia
Treatment of anemia
Treatment of anemia

Roche
Ortho Biotech
Amgen

Chemotherapy induced
neutropenia

Treatment of anemia

Dompe Biotec

Amgen/Dompec Biotech

Treatment of anemia

Amgen

Genzyme

Serono

Eli Lilly

Ares-Serono

Infertility
Anovulation and superovulation
Anovulation and superovulation

hGH deficiency in children
hGH deficiency in children

Therapeutic indication

Treatment of established
osteoporosis in postmenopausal
women
Treatment of osteoporosis in
some postmenopausal women
Used in selected assisted
reproductive techniques
Detection/treatment of thyroid
cancer
Some forms of infertility

Eli Lilly

NV Organon
NV Organon
Ares-Serono

Eli Lilly
Genentech

Company

2002 (US, EU)

1990 (US)
1989 (US)

1997 (EU)

2001 (EU)

2001 (US, EU)

1999 (EU)
1998 (US)

2000 (EU)

1998 (US), 2000 (EU)

2000 (US), 2001 (EU)

2002 (US)

2003 (EU)

1997 (US)
1996 (EU)
1995 (EU), 1997 (US)

1987 (US)
1985 (US)

Date approved

512
CHAPTER 26

Others
Kineret (anakinra; r IL-1 receptor antagonist produced in
E. coli)
Neumega (r IL-11, lacks N-terminal proline of native molecule.
Produced in E. coli)
Proleukin (r IL-2, differs from human molecule in that it is
devoid of an N-terminal alanine and contains C125→S
substitution. Produced in E. coli )
Actimmune (rh IFN-g-1b produced in E. coli)

Avonex (rh IFN-b-1a produced in CHO cells)
Betaferon (r IFN-b-1b, differs from human protein by C17→S.
Produced in E. coli)
Betaseron (rIFM-b-1b, differs from human protein by C17→S.
Produced in E. coli)

Interferon-b
Rebif (rh IFN-b-1a produced in CHO cells)

Roferon A (rh IFN-a-2b produced in E. coli)

Schering-Plough

Rebetron (combination of ribavirin and rh IFN-a-2b produced
in E. coli)
Infergen (r IFN-a, synthetic type I IFN produced in E. coli)

Prevention of chemotherapyinduced thrombocytopenia
Renal cell carcinoma

Chronic granulomatous disease

Genetics Institute

Genentech

Chiron

Rheumatoid arthritis

Relapsing/remitting multiple
sclerosis

Relapsing/remitting multiple
sclerosis
Relapsing multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis

Hairy cell leukemia

Chronic hepatitis C

Hepatitis B, C and various
cancers
Hepatitis B, C
Cancer, genital warts, hepatitis
Hepatitis B, C and various
cancers
Chronic hepatitis C

Hepatitis C
Chronic hepatitis C
Chronic hepatitis B, C
Chronic hepatitis C

Autologous bone marrow
transplantation
Chemotherapy-induced
neutropenia

Amgen

Berlex Labs/Chiron

Biogen
Schering AG

Ares-Serono

Amgen/Yamanouchi
Europe
Hoffmann-La Roche

Schering-Plough
Schering-Plough
Schering-Plough

Hoffman-La Roche
Schering-Plough
Schering-Plough
Schering-Plough
Schering-Plough

Amgen

Immunex (now Amgen)

Viraferon (rh IFN-a-2b produced in E. coli )
Intron A (r IFN-a-2b produced in E. coli )
Alfatronol (rh IFN-a-2b produced in E. coli )

Alfatronol (rh IFN-a-2b produced in E. coli )

Recombinant interferons and interleukins
Interferon-a
Pegasys (Peginterferon a-2a, produced in E. coli)
PegIntron A (PEGylated r IFN-a-2b produced in E. coli )
Viraferon (rIFN-a-2b produced in E. coli)
ViraferonPeg (PEGylated rIFN-a-2b produced in E. coli)

Leukine (r GM-CSF, differs from the native human protein by
one amino acid, Leu 23. Produced in E. coli )
Neupogen (filgrastim, r GM-CSF differs from human
protein by containing an additional N-terminal methionine.
Produced in E. coli)

1990 (US)

1992 (US)

1997 (US)

2001 (US)

1993 (US)

1997 (EU), 1996 (US)
1995 (EU)

1998 (EU), 2002 (US)

1986 (US)

1997 (US), 1999 (EU)

1999 (US)

2000 (EU)
1986 (US), 2000 (EU)
2000 (EU)

2002 (EU, US)
2000 (EU), 2001 (US)
2000 (EU)
2000 (EU)
2000 (EU)

1991 (US)

1991 (US)

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

513

SmithKline Beecham

SmithKline Beecham

Infanrix – Penta (combination vaccine, containing
rHBsAg produced in S. cerevisiae as one component)

Procomvax (combination vaccine, containing r HBsAg as one
component)
Primavax (combination vaccine, containing r HBsAg produced
in S. cerevisiae as one component)
Infanrix Hep B (combination vaccine containing rHBsAg
produced in S. cerevisiae as one component)
Twinrix (adult and pediatric forms; combination (pediatric)
vaccine containing r HBsAg produced in S. cerevisiae as one
component)
Comvax (combination vaccine, containing HbsAg produced in
S. cerevisiae, as one component)
Merck

SmithKline Beecham

SmithKline Beecham

Aventis Pasteur

Aventis Pasteur

Aventis Pasteur

Medeva Pharma

SmithKline Beecham
(EU); GlaxoSmithKline
(US)

Twinrix (adult & pediatric forms in EU. Combination vaccine
containing rHBsAg produced in S. cerevisiae as one
component)
Infanrix-Hexa (combination vaccine, containing r
HBsAg produced in S. cerevisiae as one component)

Hepacare (r S, pre-S & pre-S2 HBsAgs produced in a
mammalian (murine) cell line)
Hexavac (combination vaccine, containing rHBsAG produced
in S. cerevisiae as one component)

Aventis Pharma

SmithKline Beecham

GlaxoSmithKline

Company

HBVAXPRO (r HBsAg produced in S. cerevisiae)

Recombinant vaccines
Hepatitis B
Ambirix (combination vaccine, containing r HBsAg produced
in S. cerevisiae as one component)
Pediarix (combination vaccine containing rHBsAg produced in
S. cerevisiae as one component)

Product

Table 26.1 (cont’d)

Vaccination of infants against H.
influenzae type B and hepatitis B

Immunization against diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B,
polio and H. influenzae type B
Immunization against H.
influenzae type B and hepatitis B
Immunization against diphtheria,
tetanus, and hepatitis B
Immunization against diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis and hepatitis B
Immunization against hepatitis
A and B

Immunization against diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis,
Haemophilus influenzae type b,
hepatitis B and polio
Immunization against
diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis,
polio and hepatitis B
Immunization against hepatitis B

Immunization against hepatitis
A and B
Immunization of children against
various conditions inducing
hepatitis B
Immunization of children &
adolescents against hepatitis B
Immunization against hepatitis
A and B

Therapeutic indication

1996 (US)

1996 (EU) (adult),
1997 (EU)

1997 (EU)

1998 (EU)

1999 (EU)

2000 (EU)

2000 (EU)

2000 (EU)

1996 (EU) (adult),
1997 (EU) (pediatric),
2001 (US)
2000 (EU)

2001 (EU)

2002 (US)

2002 (EU)

Date approved

514
CHAPTER 26

Zenapax (daclizumab, humanized mAb directed against the
a-chain of the IL-2 receptor)
Humaspect (Votumumab, human mAb directed against
cytokeratin tumor-associated antigen)
Mabthera (Rituximab, chimeric mAb directed against CD20
surface antigen of B lymphocytes. See also Rituxan)

Remicade (infliximab, chimeric mAb directed against TNF-a)
Synagis (palivizumab, humanized mAb directed against an
epitope on the surface of respiratory syncytial virus)

Monoclonal antibody-based products
Bexxar (tositumomab; radiolabeled monoclonal antibody
directed against CD20, produced in a mammalian cell line)
Xolair (Omalizumab; rIgG1kMab that binds IgE, produced in
CHO cells)
Humira (adalimumab; r human monoclonal antibody
(antiTNF) created using phage display technology and
produced in a mammalian cell line)
Zevalin (Ibritumomab Tiuxetan; murine monoclonal antibody
produced in a CHO cell line, targeted against the CD20
antigen. A radiotherapy agent)
Mabcampath (EU) or Campath (US) (alemtuzumab; a
humanized monoclonal antibody directed against CD52
surface antigen of B-lymphocytes)
Mylotarg (gemtuzumab zogamicin; a humanized antibodytoxic antibiotic conjugate targeted against CD33 antigen
found on leukemic blast cells)
Herceptin (trastuzumab, humanized antibody directed against
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2))

Other
Lymerix (r OspA, a lipoprotein found on the surface of
B. burgdorferi. Produced in E. coli )
Tricelluvax (combination vaccine containing r modified
pertussis toxin as one component)

Tritanrix-HB (combination vaccine, containing r HBsAg
produced in S. cerevisiae as one component)
Recombivax (r HBsAg produced in S. cerevisiae)

Hoffmann-La Roche

Organon Teknika

Hoffmann-La Roche

Centocor
MedImmune (US);
Abbott (EU)

Genentech (US); Roche
Registration (EU)

Millennium & ILEX (EU);
Berlex, ILEX & Millennium
Pharmaceuticals (US)
Wyeth

IDEC Pharmaceuticals

Abbott Laboratories

Genentech

Corixa/GlaxoSmithKline

Chiron SpA

SmithKline Beecham

Merck

SmithKline Beecham

1998 (EU)

1998 (EU)

1997 (US), 1999 (EU)

1998 (US), 1999 (EU)
1998 (US), 1999 (EU)

1998 (US), 2000 (EU)

Treatment of metastatic breast
cancer if tumor overexpresses
HER2 protein
Treatment of Crohn disease
Prophylaxis of lower tract
respiratory disease caused by
syncytial virus in pediatric patients
Prevention of acute kidney
transplant rejection
Detection of carcinoma of the
colon or rectum
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

2000 (US)

2001 (EU, US)

2002 (US)

2002 (US)

2003 (US)

2003 (US)

1999 (EU)

1998 (US)

1986 (US)

1996 (EU)

Acute myeloid leukemia

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia

Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

Rheumatoid arthritis

Treatment of CD20 positive
follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Asthma

Immunization against
diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis

Lyme disease vaccine

Vaccination against hepatitis B,
diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis
Hepatitis B prevention

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

515

Galactosidase
Fabrazyme (rh a-galactosidase produced in CHO cells)

Osteogenic protein 1 (rh osteogenic protein 1 BMP-7,
produced in CHO cells:

Miscellaneous recombinant products
Bone morphogenetic proteins
Inductos (dibotermin alfa; r Bone morphogenic protein-2
produced in CHO cells)
Infuse (rh Bone morphogenic protein-2 produced in CHO cells)

LeukoScan (Sulesomab, murine mAb fragment (Fab) directed
against NCA 90, a surface granulocyte nonspecific crossreacting antigen)
Rituxan (rituximab chimeric mAb directed against CD20
antigen found on the surface of B lymphocytes)
Verluma (Nofetumomab murine mAb fragments (Fab)
directed against carcinoma-associated antigen)
Tecnemab KI (murine mAb fragments (Fab/Fab2 mix) directed
against HMW-MAA)
ProstaScint (capromab-pentetate murine mAb-directed
against the tumor surface antigen PSMA)
MyoScint (imiciromab-pentetate, murine mAb fragment
directed against human cardiac myosin)
CEA-scan (arcitumomab, murine mAb fragment (Fab),
directed against human carcinoembryonic antigen, CEA)
Indimacis 125 (Igovomab, murine mAb fragment (Fab2)
directed against the tumor-associated antigen CA 125)
ReoPro (abciximab, Fab fragments derived from a chimeric
mAb, directed against the platelet surface receptor GPIIb/IIIa)
OncoScint CR/OV (satumomab pendetide, murine mAb
directed against TAG-72, a tumor-associated glycoprotein)
Orthoclone OKT3 (Muromomab CD3, murine mAb directed
against the T-lymphocyte surface antigen CD3)

Simulect (basiliximab, chimeric mAb directed against the
a-chain of the IL-2 receptor)

Product

Table 26.1 (cont’d)

Genetics Institute/Wyeth
Europa
Medtronic Sofamor
Danek
Howmedica (EU); Stryker
(US)

Ortho Biotech

Cytogen

Centocor

CIS Bio

Immunomedics

Centocor

Cytogen

Genentech/IDEC
Pharmaceuticals
Boehringer Ingelheim/
NeoRx
Sorin

Immunomedics

Novartis

Company

Fabry disease (a-galactosidase A
deficiency)

Treatment of acute tibia
fractures
Promotes fusion of lower spine
vertebrae
Treatment of non-union of tibia

Detection/staging/follow-up of
colorectal and ovarian cancers
Reversal of acute kidney
transplant rejection

Detection of small-cell lung
cancer
Diagnosis of cutaneous
melanoma lesions
Detection/staging/follow-up of
prostate adenocarcinoma
Myocardial infarction imaging
agent
Detection of recurrent/
metastatic colorectal cancer
Diagnosis of ovarian
adenocarcinoma
Prevention of blood clots

Prophylaxis of acute organ
rejection in allogeneic renal
transplantation
Diagnostic imaging for
infection/inflammation in bone
of patients with osteomyelitis
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

Therapeutic indication

2001 (EU), 2003 (US)

2001 (EU, US)

2002 (US)

2002 (EU)

1986 (US)

1992 (US)

1994 (US)

1996 (EU)

1996 (US, EU)

1996 (US)

1996 (US)

1996 (EU)

1996 (US)

1997 (US)

1997 (EU)

1998 (EU)

Date approved
516
CHAPTER 26

Genentech

Genzyme

Seragen/Ligand
Pharmaceuticals
Ortho-McNeil
Pharmaceutical (US);
Janssen-Cilag (EU)
ISIS pharmaceuticals

Boehringer Ingelheim

Amgen (US); Wyeth (EU)

Eli Lilly

Scios

Sanofi-Synthelabo

Biomarin
Pharmaceuticals
Biogen

Genzyme
TKT Europe

Cystic fibrosis

Treatment of cytomegalovirus
retinitis in AIDS patients
Treatment of Gaucher disease

Lower extremity diabetic
neuropathic ulcers

Adjunct to surgery for
subsequent tumor removal, to
prevent or delay amputation
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma

Rheumatoid arthritis

1993 (US)

1994 (US)

1998 (US)

1997 (US),1999 (EU)

1999 (US)

1999 (EU)

1998 (US), 2000 (EU)

2001 (US), 2002 (EU)

Aug 2001

2001 (EU), 2002 (US)

Hyperuricemia
Acutely decompensated
congestive heart failure
Severe sepsis

2003 (US)

2003 (US)

2001 (EU)

Treatment of
mucopolysaccharidosis
Treatment of adults with
moderate to severe chronic
plaque psoriasis

Fabry disease (a-galactosidase A
deficiency)

Data were collected from several industry sources (http://www.fda.gov, http://www.eudra.org/en_home.htm, http://www.phrma.org).
Products are listed in chronological order, with the most recent approvals first. Where more than one drug in the same category was approved in a single year, they are listed
alphabetically. Several products have been approved for multiple indications, but only the first indication for which it was approved is listed here. Products are listed by trade
name. Abbreviations: r, recombinant; rh, recombinant human; CHO, Chinese hamster ovary; BHK, baby hamster kidney; mAb, mono-clonal antibody; tPA, tissue plasminogen
activator; hGH, human growth hormone; FSH, follicle stimulating hormone; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; EPO, erythropoietin; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; HbsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; PDGF, platelet derived growth factor; TNFR, tumor necrosis factor receptor.

Cerezyme (r-b-glucocerebrosidase produced in E. coli. Differs
from native human enzyme by one amino acid, R495H, and
has modified oligosaccharide component)
Pulmozyme (dornase-a, r DNase produced in CHO cells)

Vitravene (fomivirsen, an antisense oligonucleotide)

Ontak (r IL-2–diphtheria toxin fusion protein that targets cells
displaying a surface IL-2 receptor)
Regranex (rh PDGF produced in S. cerevisiae)

Other
Aldurazyme (laronidase; r-alfa-L-iduronidase produced in
CHO cells)
Amevive (alefacept; a dimeric fusion protein consisting of the
extracellular CD2-binding portion of the human leukocyte
functional antigen 3 (LFA-3) linked to the Fc region of human
IgG1. Produced in CHO cells)
Fasturtec (Elitex in US; rasburicase, rUrate oxidase produced in
S. cerevisiae)
Natrecor (nesiritide, recombinant form of human B-type
natriuretic peptide (rhBNP))
Xigris (drotrecogin-a; rh activated protein C produced in a
mammalian (human) cell line)
Enbrel (r TNF receptor–IgG fragment fusion protein produced
in CHO cells)
Beromun (rh TNF-a, produced in E. coli)

Replagal (rh a-galactosidase produced in a continuous human
cell line)

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

517

518

CHAPTER 26

direct recombinant proteins to the periplasm (Jeong
& Lee 2000), have been very successful (see Baneyx
& Mujacic 2004 for a review). Mammalian proteins
targeted to the bacterial periplasm are more likely to
fold correctly because this compartment has the ability to form and isomerize disulfide bonds. An alternative strategy, which has also been successful, is the
expression of protein disulfide isomerases in the bacterial cytosol along with the recombinant protein of
interest (Besette et al. 1999).
Yeast cells grow in a similar manner to bacterial
cells and, like bacteria, require simple and relatively
inexpensive media for growth. However, they are
eukaryotes and are therefore able to fold and
assemble complex recombinant proteins much more
efficiently than bacteria. The secretion of recombinant proteins from cultured yeast cells allows the
formation of disulfide bonds, proteolytic maturation, N- and O-linked glycosylation, and other posttranslational modifications that occur either not
at all or very inefficiently in bacteria. Saccharomyces
cerevisiae was the first yeast used for recombinant
protein production, and it is used for the commercial
production of several approved drugs and vaccines
(Table 26.1) including the current hepatitis B virus
vaccine (Valenzuela et al. 1982).
Unfortunately, as a general production system for
recombinant pharmaceuticals, S. cerevisiae suffers
from a number of limitations including low product
yield, poor plasmid stability, difficulties in scaling
up production, the hyperglycosylation of recombinant human glycoproteins, and inefficient secretion
(Romanos et al. 1992, Dominguez et al. 1998).
Although improved S. cerevisiae strains have been
described, some of which generate glycan chains
compatible with humans (Chiba et al. 1998) other
yeast species have been developed as alternative
production hosts. These include another popular
model organism – Schizosaccharomyces pombe – as
well as the methylotrophic yeasts Pichia pastoris and
Hansenula polymorpha, the dairy yeast Kluyveromyces
lactis, and others such as Schwanniomyces occidentalis
and Yarrowia lipolytica (Chapter 11). These organisms often outperform S. cerevisiae in terms of yield,
reduced hyperglycosylation, and secretion efficiency. The methylotrophic yeasts in particular are
now emerging as competitive production systems
(Cereghino et al. 2002, Gerngross 2004).
Filamentous fungi have also been explored as
production systems for recombinant therapeutic
proteins, reflecting their high capacity for protein
secretion (Punt et al. 2002, Gerngross 2004).

Heterologous gene expression was first achieved in
filamentous fungi using the laboratory organism
Aspergillus nidulans, but can now also be carried out
in a variety of industrially important species, such
as A. niger, A. oryzae, Trichoderma reesei, Acremonium
chrysogenum, and Penicillium chrysogenum.
Despite the success of microbes in biotechnology,
it is mammalian cells that have dominated the biopharmaceutical industry since the mid-1990s. This
is because only mammalian cells can glycosylate
human proteins in the correct manner (Andersen
& Krummen 2002). There are several principal cell
lines of choice: Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells,
and the murine myeloma cell lines NS0 and SP2/0,
BHK and HEK-293 cells, and the human retinal line
PER-C6 – these have been used to produce most of
the recombinant therapeutic products licensed by
the FDA up to June 2006.
Transgenic animals and plants can also be
used as bioreactors to produce recombinant
proteins
The production of growth hormone in the serum of
transgenic mice (Palmiter et al. 1982a, see p. 259)
provided the first evidence that recombinant proteins could be produced, continuously, in the body
fluids of animals. Five years later, several groups
reported the secretion of recombinant proteins in
mouse milk. In each case, this was achieved by joining the transgene to a mammary-specific promoter,
such as that from the casein gene. The first proteins
produced in this way were sheep β-lactoglobulin
(Simons et al. 1987) and human tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA) (Gordon et al. 1987, Pittius et al.
1988). There have been over 100 such reports since
these early experiments, and a selection is listed in
Table 26.2.
Although proteins can be produced at high concentrations in mouse milk (e.g. 50 ng/ml for tPA)
the system is not ideal due to the small volume
of milk produced. Therefore, other animals, such as
sheep and goats, have been investigated as possible bioreactors. Such animals not only produce
large volumes of milk, but the regulatory practices
regarding the use of their milk are more acceptable.
An early success was Tracy, a transgenic ewe producing extremely high levels (30 g/l) of human
α1-antitrypsin in her milk (Wright et al. 1991).
Artificially inseminated eggs were microinjected with
a DNA construct containing an AAT gene fused to a
β-lactoglobulin promoter. These eggs were implanted

519

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

Table 26.2 A selection of recombinant proteins that have been expressed in the milk of transgenic animals.

Coding sequence

Promoter region

Gene

Source

a1 antitrypsin
a1 antitrypsin
a1 antitrypsin
a-glucosidase
a-lactalbumin
a-lactalbumin
a-lactalbumin
a-lactalbumin
as1-casein
Anti-CD6 antibodies
Antithrombin III
b-casein
b-casein
b-casein
b-casein
b-interferon
b-lactoglobulin
g-interferon
k-casein
k-casein
CFTR
EPO
EPO
Factor VIII
Factor IX
Factor IX
Fibrinogen
FSH
GM-CSF
Growth homone
Growth homone
Hepatitis B surface antigen
IGF-1
Interleukin-2
Lactoferrin
Lactoferrin
Lysozyme
Protein C
Protein C
Serum albumin
Superoxide dismutase
Superoxide dismutase
Surfactant protein B
TAP
t-PA
t-PA
t-PA
t-PA
Trophoblastin
Urokinase
WAP
WAP
WAP
WAP

Mouse
Human
Human
Human
Bovine
Goat
Guinea-pig
Human
Bovine
Mouse/Human
Human
Bovine
Bovine
Goat
Rat
Human
Sheep
Human
Bovine
Goat
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Bovine
Human
Bovine
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Sheep
Human
Mouse
Rat
Mouse
Mouse

Transgenic species
Mice
Mice
Sheep
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Rats
Mice
Mice
Goat
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Rabbits
Sheep
Mice
Sheep
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Goat
Rabbits
Rabbits
Mice
Cattle
Mice
Mice
Pigs
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Rabbits
Goats
Mice
Mice
Mice
Mice
Pigs
Sheep

Gene

Source

WAP
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
as1-casein
a-lactalbumin
a-lactalbumin
a-lactalbumin
a-lactalbumin
as1-casein
WAP
J-casein
b-casein
a-lactalbumin
b-casein
b-casein
WAP
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
b-casein
b-casein
b-casein
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
WAP
J-casein
as1-casein
WAP
J-casein
as1-casein
as1-casein
b-casein
as1-casein
as1-casein
as1-casein
WAP
WAP
b-lactoglobulin
b-lactoglobulin
WAP
WAP
WAP
WAP
as1-casein
as1-casein
WAP
a-lactalbumin
as1-casein
WAP
WAP
WAP
WAP

Rabbit
Sheep
Sheep
Bovine
Bovine
Goat
Guinea-pig
Human
Bovine
Rabbit
Goat
Bovine
Bovine
Goat
Rat
Mouse
Sheep
Sheep
Goat
Goat
Goat
Bovine
Bovine
Sheep
Sheep
Sheep
Mouse
Rat
Bovine
Rat
Rat
Bovine
Bovine
Rabbit
Bovine
Bovine
Bovine
Mouse
Mouse
Sheep
Sheep
Mouse
Rat
Rat
Mouse
Bovine
Bovine
Mouse
Bovine
Bovine
Mouse
Rat
Mouse
Mouse

520

CHAPTER 26

into surrogate mothers, of which 112 gave birth.
Four females, including Tracy, and one male were
found to have incorporated intact copies of the gene
and all five developed normally. Over the lactation
period sheep can produce 250–800 liters of milk so
the production potential is significant.
Using similar protocols Ebert et al. (1991) have
demonstrated the production of a variant of human
tPA in goat milk. Of 29 offspring, one male and
one female contained the transgene. The transgenic
female underwent two pregnancies and one out
of five offspring was transgenic. Milk collected over
her first lactation contained only a few mg of tPA
per liter, but improved expression constructs have
since resulted in an animal generating several grams
per liter of the protein. Recombinant human antithrombin III, which is used to prevent blood clots
forming in patients who have undergone heart bypass
operations, was the first protein expressed in transgenic animal milk to reach commercial production,
and is currently marketed by Genzyme Transgenics
Corporation.
The production of foreign proteins in secreted body
fluids has the obvious advantage that transgenic
animals can be used as a renewable source of the
desirable molecule. In addition to milk, other production systems have been investigated including serum
(Massoud et al. 1991), semen (Dyck et al. 1999), and
urine (Kerr et al. 1998, Ryoo et al. 2001, Zbikowska
et al. 2002). In each case, an important consideration is whether the protein is stable, and whether
it folds and assembles correctly. The assembly of
complex proteins comprising up to three separate
polypeptides has been demonstrated in milk, e.g.
fibrinogen (Prunkard et al. 1996), collagen ( John et al.
1999), and various immunoglobulins (e.g. Castilla
et al. 1998). Other abundantly secreted fluids which
are likely to be exploited for recombinant protein
expression in the future include the albumen of hens’
eggs and silkworm cocoons. Hens’ eggs would be commercially attractive but this technology is currently
limited by the lack of efficient gene-transfer methods
in birds (Harvey et al. 2002). There has also been
some success with silkworms, using both microinjection (e.g. Nagaraju et al. 1996) and infection of
silkworm larvae with baculovirus vectors (Yamao
et al. 1999, Tamura et al. 1999, Tomita et al. 2003).
Plants are a useful alternative to animals for
recombinant protein production because they are
inexpensive to grow and scale up from laboratory
testing to commercial production. Therefore, there is
much interest in using plants as production systems

for the synthesis of recombinant proteins (Twyman
et al. 2003, 2005, Ma et al. 2003). There is some concern that therapeutic molecules produced in animal
expression systems could be contaminated with
small quantities of endogenous viruses or prions, a
risk factor that is absent from plants. Furthermore,
plants carry out very similar post-translational
modification reactions to animal cells with only
minor differences in glycosylation patterns, although
there is some controversy as to the exact capabilities
of plants in this context (Cabanes-Macheteau et al.
1999, Seveno et al. 2004, Shah et al. 2004).
A selection of therapeutic proteins that have been
expressed in plants is listed in Table 26.3. The first
such report was the expression of human growth
hormone, as a fusion with the Agrobacterium nopaline
synthase gene, in transgenic tobacco and sunflower
tissue, although in this study only the transcript and
not the protein was detected (Barta et al. 1986). Hiatt
et al. (1989) reported the expression of an antibody
in tobacco and this represents a large class of therapeutic molecules although the antibody Hiatt and
colleagues chose to express was raised against a plant
epitope and had no therapeutic applications. The
first human therapeutic protein expressed in plants
was human serum albumin (Sijmons et al. 1990).
Tobacco has been the most frequently used host for
recombinant protein expression, although edible
crops including cereals, fruits, and vegetables are
becoming more popular since recombinant proteins
produced in such crops could in principle be administered orally with minimal purification. The expression of human antibodies in plants has particular
relevance in this context because the consumption of plant material containing recombinant
antibodies could provide passive immunity (i.e.
immunity brought about without stimulating the
host immune system). Many different types of antibody have been expressed in plants, predominantly
tobacco, including full-size immunoglobulins, Fab
fragments, and scFvs. For example, a fully humanized antibody against herpes simplex virus-2 has
been expressed in soybean (Zeitlin et al. 1998). Even
secretory IgA antibodies, which have four separate
polypeptide components, have been successfully
expressed in plants. This experiment involved the
generation of four separate transgenic tobacco
lines, each expressing a single component, and the
sequential crossing of these lines to generate plants
in which all four transgenes were stacked (Ma et al.
1995). Plants producing recombinant sIgA against
the oral pathogen Streptococcus mutans have been

521

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

Table 26.3 A selection of therapeutic recombinant proteins that have been expressed in genetically modified plants.
(a) Biopharmaceuticals

Protein

Host plant system

Potential application

Adenosine deaminase

Maize

SCID

Angiotensin-1 converting enzyme

Tobacco and tomato (virus infected)

Hypertension

Aprotinin

Maize

Bleeding, pancreatitis

Collagen, human

Tobacco

Tissue repair

Enkephalins, human

Arabidopsis, canola seeds

Antihyperanalgesic

Epidermal growth factor, human

Wound repair, cell proliferation

Erythropoietin, human

Tobacco, transgenic and transient
expression
Tobacco suspension cells

Factor XIII (A-domain)

Tobacco

Bleeding

Glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD65)

Tobacco

Diabetes

Glucocerebrosidase

Tobacco

Gaucher’s disease

Growth hormone, human

Tobacco leaves (chloroplast
expression), tobacco seeds

Pituitary dwarfism

Hemoglobin (a- and b-globin),
human

Tobacco seeds

Blood substitute

Hirudin, leech

Canola

Anticoagulant

Insulin-like growth factor-1

Tobacco, rice

Diabetes

Interleukin-2

Potato

Antiviral, anticancer

Interleukin-4

Tobacco

Interleukin-10

Tobacco

Antiviral, anticancer

Interleukin-12

Tobacco

Antiviral, anticancer

Interleukin-18

Tobacco

Antiviral, anticancer

Intrinsic factor

Arabidopsis leaves

Diagnostic, supplement

Lactoferrin

Potato tubers, rice, tobacco,
viral vectors in tobacco

Antimicrobial

Lysozyme

Rice grains, rice cell culture

Antimicrobial

Pancreatic lipase

Tobacco, maize

Exocrine pancreatic deficiency

Protein C, human

Tobacco

Anticoagulant

Secreted alkaline phosphatase,
human

Tobacco (secretion)

Ovarian and testicular cancer

Serum albumin, human

Tobacco and potato leaves, tobacco
chloroplasts, potato tubers

Burns, liver cirrhosis

SMAP-29
Synthetic elastin

Tobacco
Tobacco,
Tobacco chloroplasts
Rice, turnip
Tobacco (virus infected)

Antimicrobial
Tissue repair

a-Interferon, human
a-Trichosanthin, viral

Anemia

Hepatitis
HIV

522

CHAPTER 26

Table 26.3 (cont’d)
(b) Recombinant antibodies

Antigen

Antibody format

Production system

B cell lymphoma, murine 38C13

scFv

Virus vectors in tobacco leaves

Carcinoembryonic antigen

scFv, IgGl
dAb
scFv

Tobacco agroinfiltation
Tobacco, agroinfiltration and transgenic
Rice, rice cell cultures, wheat, pea

CD-40

scFv-fusion

Tobacco suspension cells

Colon cancer antigen

IgG

Virus vectors in tobacco leaves

Creatine kinase

IgGl, Fab
scFv

Tobacco leaves, Arabidopsis leaves
Tobacco leaves

Rhesus D antigen

IgGl

Arabidopsis leaves

Ferritin

scFv

Tobacco leaves

Hepatitis B virus surface antigen

IgG

Tobacco leaves

Herpes simplex virus 2

IgGl

Soybean

HIV antibodies in blood

scFv-fusion

Tobacco leaves, barley grains, potato tubers

Human choriogonadotropin

scFv, dAb, IgG

Tobacco leaves

Human IgG

IgGl

Alfalfa

Interleukin-4

scFv

Tobacco roots

Interleukin-6

scFv

Tobacco roots

Streptococcal surface antigen (I/II)

sIgA
IgGl
IgGl

Tobacco leaves
Tobacco leaves
Secretion from tobacco roots

Substance P

VH

Tobacco leaves

generated (Ma et al. 1998), and these plant-derived
antibodies (“plantibodies”) are being commercially
developed as the drug CaroRx™, marketed by Planet
Biotechnology Inc., which at the time of writing is
coming to the end of Phase II clinical trials.
Plants have been explored as cheap, safe, and
efficient production systems for subunit vaccines
(Table 26.4), with the added advantage that orally
administered vaccines can be ingested by eating the
plant, therefore limiting the need for processing and
purification (reviewed by Mason & Arntzen 1995,
Walmsey & Arntzen 2000). The earliest demonstration was the expression of a surface antigen from
the bacterium S. mutans in tobacco. This bacterium
is the cause of tooth decay, and it was envisaged
that stimulation of a mucosal immune response
would prevent the bacterium colonizing the teeth
and therefore protect against cavities (Curtis &
Cardineau, 1990 Patent Application).

A number of edible transgenic plants have been
generated expressing antigens derived from animal
viruses. For example, rabies glycoprotein has been
expressed in tomato (McGarvey et al. 1995), hepatitis
B virus antigen in lettuce (Ehsani et al. 1997), and
cholera antigen in potato (Arakawa et al. 1997). As
well as animal virus antigens, autoantigens associated with diabetes have also been produced (Ma
et al. 1997, Porceddu et al. 1999). Plants have also
been infected with recombinant viruses expressing
various antigen epitopes on their surfaces. Cowpea
mosaic virus (CMV) has been extensively developed
as a heterologous antigen-presenting system (Porta
et al. 1994, Lomonossoff & Hamilton 1999). There
has been some success in vaccination trials using
recombinant CMV vectors expressing epitopes of
HIV gp41 (McLain et al. 1995, 1996a, 1996b) and
canine parvovirus (Dalsgaard et al. 1997). The first
clinical trials using a plant-derived vaccine were

Table 26.4 Vaccine candidates produced in plants.

Antigen
For animal diseases
Bovine herpes virus (type 1) glycoprotein D
Bovine rotavirus
Canine parvovoris VP2 epitope
Enterotoxigenic E. coli fimbral subunit FaeG
Foot and mouth disease virus VP1 epitope

Infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) S1 glycoprotein
Mannheimia hemolytica A1 leukotoxin 50
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) spike protein
Rabies virus glycoprotein (G)
Rabies virus glycoprotein (G) and nucleoprotein (N)
Rinderpest virus hemagglutinin (H) protein
Transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus
N-terminal domain of the spike glycoprotein (S)

Production system
Tobacco leaves
Tobacco leaves, transgenic and virus infected
Arabidopsis thaliana leaves
Tobacco leaves (chloroplast expression)
Tobacco leaves
Alfalfa leaf
Arabadopsis thaliana leaves
Potato tuber
Potato tuber
White clover leaves
Tobacco leaves
Potato leaves
Tomato leaves and fruit
Viral vectors in tobacco and spinach leaves
Pigeon pea leaves, tobacco leaves
Arabidopsis thaliana leaves
Maize seeds
Potato tubers
Tobacco leaves

For human diseases
Bacillus anthracis protective antigen
Enterotoxigenic E. coli conjugal pilus, A subunit
Enterotoxigenic E. coli heat labile toxin, B subunit

E. coli O157:H7 intimin
Hepatitis B virus surface antigen

Hepatitis C virus HVR1 epitope of E2 envelope protein
Hepatitis E virus ORF2 protein
Human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B
Human immunodeficiency virus (type 1) p24 protein
Human immunodeficiency virus (type 1) p120 protein
Human papillomavirus (type 11) L1 protein
Human papillomavirus (type 16) E7 protein
Human papillomavirus (type 16) L1 protein
Measles virus hemagglutinin
Norwalk virus capsid protein
Plasmodium falciparum (PfMSP1)
Respiratory syncytial virus fusion protein
Rotavirus NSP4 protein
Rotavirus VP6 protein

Rotavirus VP7 protein
Simian/Human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) 89.6p Tat
Tetanus toxin, fragment C
V. cholerae cholera toxin, B subunit (as single antigen)

Tobacco leaves
Tobacco leaves
Maize seeds
Potato tubers
Tomato fruit and leaves
Tobacco leaves
Cherry tomatillo leaves and fruit
Lettuce leaves
Lupin callus tissue
Potato tubers
Soybean cell suspension cultures
Tobacco leaves
Tobacco leaves
Tomato leaves and fruit
Tobacco seeds
Virus vectors in tobacco
Virus vectors in tobacco
Tobacco leaves, potato tuber
Virus vectors in tobacco
Tobacco leaves, potato tubers
Carrot leaves and taproots
Tobacco leaves
Tobacco leaves, potato tubers
Tobacco leaves
Tomato fruit
Potato tubers
Potato tubers
Tomato suspension cells
Virus vectors in tobacco leaves
Potato tubers
Potato tubers
Tobacco leaves (chloroplast expression)
Potato tubers
Tobacco leaves
Tobacco leaves (chloroplast expression)
Tomato leaves and fruit

524

CHAPTER 26

conducted in 1997, and involved the ingestion of
transgenic potatoes expressing the B subunit of the
E. coli heat labile toxin, which causes diarrhea. This
resulted in a successful elicitation of mucosal immunity in test subjects (Tacket et al. 1998).
Metabolic engineering allows the directed
production of small molecules in bacteria
When the large-scale production of penicillin began
in the 1940s, yields were measured in micrograms per liter of culture. Demand for the antibiotic
was outstripping supply and higher yielding strains
were badly needed. Since nothing was known about
the biosynthetic pathway a program of strain improvement was set in place that involved random
mutation and screening. The best strain from each
cycle of improvement then became the starting point
for the next round of selection. In this way the yield
of penicillin was steadily increased until it reached
the tens of grams per liter that can be achieved today.
As each new antibiotic was discovered the same
process of strain improvement was applied. In every
case, the biochemical and genetic bases of the beneficial mutations were not known. Only when the
details of gene regulation and metabolic pathway
regulation (allosteric control) had been elucidated
could we even begin to understand how antibiotic
yields might have been improved.
Based on our current knowledge of metabolic
regulation we can predict that the changes in the
improved strains described above will involve all of
the following:
•
•
•
•
•

•

Removal of rate-limiting transcriptional and
allosteric controls.
Kinetic enhancement of rate-limiting enzymes.
Genetic inhibition of competing pathways.
Enhanced carbon commitment to the primary
metabolic pathway from central metabolism.
Modification of secondary metabolic pathways to
enhance energy metabolism and the availability
of enzymatic cofactors.
Enhanced transport of the compound out of the
cell.

Today, if one starts with a wild-type strain and
wants to turn it into an overproducer then recombinant DNA technology would be used to make these
desired changes in a rational way as exemplified below
by phenylalanine. There are many other examples of
rational metabolic engineering in bacteria and these
have been reviewed by Chotani et al. (2000).

Phenylalanine is a key raw material for the
synthesis of the artificial sweetener aspartame.
Phenylalanine can be synthesized chemically but is
too expensive if made this way. In the 1980s bacterial strains that overproduced phenylalanine were
developed using the traditional mutation and selection method. At the same time a program of rational
strain development was instituted at G.D. Searle, the
company that owned the patent to aspartame. The
starting point for this program was an analysis of
the biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 26.2). Removing
feedback inhibition at key points was an essential
first step. In the case of a phenylalanine producer it is
essential to knock out any feedback inhibition of the
pathway from chorismate to phenylalanine and this
was achieved by selecting strains resistant to phenylalanine analogs. The conversion of E4P and PEP
to DAHP is also subject to feedback inhibition but
since there are three different enzymes here, each
inhibited by a different aromatic end product, all that
is necessary for a phenylalanine overproducer is to
clone the tryptophan-sensitive enzyme and have it
overexpressed. To overcome repression of enzyme
synthesis the existing promoters were removed and
replaced with one that could be controlled more
easily in industrial-scale fermentations.
The above changes removed the natural control
circuits. The next step was to remove competing
pathways, i.e. the synthesis of tyrosine and tryptophan. This was achieved easily by making a tyrosine
and tryptophan double auxotroph. Note that stable
(non-reverting) auxotrophs can best be made by
deleting part or all of the relevant genes. This is a task
that is easy using recombinant DNA technology.
Once all the control circuits and competing pathways had been removed, attempts were made to
increase the carbon flux through the biosynthetic
pathway. Surprisingly, overexpressing all the genes
in the pathway did not enhance the yield of phenylalanine. One explanation was that the supply of
precursors (E4P and/or PEP) was rate limiting.
This was confirmed when cloning transketolase
(to enhance E4P levels) and eliminating pyruvate
kinase (to enhance PEP levels) enhanced yields.
Metabolic engineering provides new routes to
small molecules
Recombinant DNA technology can be used to
develop novel routes to small molecules. Good examples are the microbial synthesis of the blue dye indigo
(Ensley et al. 1983) and the black pigment melanin
(Della-Cioppa et al. 1990). Neither compound is

525

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

Erythrose-4-phosphate (E4P) + phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP)

DAHP

Chorismate

Prephenate

Anthranilate

Indoleglycerol phosphate

Fig. 26.2 The regulation of the biosynthesis
of aromatic amino acids. Note that
indoleglycerol phosphate is converted to
tryptophan via indole but that the indole
normally is not released from the tryptophan
synthase complex.

Tyrosine

produced in bacteria. The cloning of a single gene
from Pseudomonas putida, that encoding naphthalene
dioxygenase, resulted in the generation of an E. coli
strain able to synthesize indigo in a medium containing tryptophan (Fig. 26.3). Similarly, cloning a
tyrosinase gene in E. coli led to the conversion
of tyrosine to dopaquinone, which spontaneously
converts to melanin in the presence of air. To overproduce these compounds one generates a strain of
E. coli that overproduces either tryptophan or tyrosine rather than phenylalanine as described above.
With both indigo and melanin, yields are improved
by increasing the levels of cofactors. Also, in the case
of indigo biosynthesis it is necessary to engineer the
tryptophan synthase gene. The reason for this is
that indole is an intermediate in the biosynthesis of
tryptophan (Fig. 26.2). However, normally it is
not free in the cytoplasm but remains trapped within
the tryptophan synthase complex. By modifying the
trpB gene, encoding the subunit of tryptophan synthase, it was possible for the indole to be released
for conversion by the dioxygenase (Murdock et al.
1993).
One disadvantage of the new route to indigo is that
one of the intermediates in its synthesis, indoxyl, can
undergo an alternative spontaneous oxidation to
isatin and indirubin. The latter compound is an

Phenylalanine

Tryptophan

Repression
Feedback inhibition

isomer of indigo with similar dyeing properties but
is a deep burgundy color instead of blue. To make
textile-quality indigo, there must be no indirubin
present. Screening soil microorganisms with the
capacity to degrade indole resulted in the identification of an enzyme, isatin hydrolase, which can
degrade isatin to isatic acid. After cloning the gene
for isatin hydrolase in the indigo overproducing
strains, the indigo product obtained performed as
well as chemically produced material.
A slightly different approach to that above has
yielded a new route to vitamin C. The conventional
process starts with glucose and comprises one microbiological and four chemical steps (Fig. 26.4). By
cloning in Erwinia the Corynebacterium gene encoding 2,5-diketogluconic acid reductase, the process can
be simplified to a single microbiological and a single
chemical step (Anderson et al. 1985). After observations of unexpectedly low yields of 2-ketogulonic
acid in the recombinant strain, it was found that 2ketogulonic acid was converted to l-idonic acid by
an endogenous 2-ketoaldonate reductase. Cloning,
deletion mutagenesis, and homologous recombination of the mutated reductase gene into the chromosome were some of the several steps taken to develop
an organism capable of accumulating large amounts
(120 g/l) of 2-ketogulonic acid (Lazarus et al. 1990).

526

CHAPTER 26

NH2
CH2

COOH

CH

N
Tryptophan
Tryptophanase (E.coli)

N
Indole
Naphthalene dioxygenase
(cloned)
H

OH

H

OH

N
cis-indole-2, 3-dihydrodiol

O

N
N
Indoxyl
Air oxidation

ox

ida

O
NH2
Isatic acid

tio

n

O

O
N

N

N

O
Indigo

OH

O

Isatin
Air

O

Isatin
hydrolase

OH

Air
oxidation

Spontaneous

O
Indirubin

So far, attempts to manufacture vitamin C directly
from glucose have been unsuccessful. However,
enzymes that can convert 2-ketogulonic acid to
ascorbic acid have been identified and the objective
now is to clone these activities into Erwinia (Chotani
et al. 2000).
Combinatorial biosynthesis can produce
completely novel compounds
A number of widely used antibiotics and immunosuppressants belong to a class of molecules known as
polyketides. These molecules, which are synthesized
by actinomycetes, have a fairly complex structure

N

Fig. 26.3 The
biosynthesis of indigo
in E. coli and the
formation of alternative
end products.

(Fig. 26.5). The genes involved in the biosynthesis
of polyketides are clustered, thereby facilitating the
cloning of all of the genes controlling the pathway.
The first cluster to be cloned (the act genes) was
that for actinorhodin. When parts of the act gene
cluster were introduced into streptomycetes making
related polyketides completely new antibiotics were
produced (Hopwood et al. 1985). For example, introducing the actVA gene from Streptomyces coelicolor
into a strain that makes medermycin leads to the
synthesis of mederrhodin A (Fig. 26.6). This approach
has been repeated many times since with other polyketides (for review see Baltz 1998) and is known as
combinatorial biosynthesis.

527

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

(a)
D-glucose

Chemical

Acetobacter
suboxydans

D-sorbitol

L-sorbose

Chemical

Ascorbic acid

Chemical

Chemical

2 keto-Lgulonic acid

Diacetone
-2 keto-Lgulonic acid

(b)

Fig. 26.4 Simplified
route to vitamin C
(ascorbic acid)
developed by cloning
in Erwinia the
Corynebacterium gene
for 2,5-diketogluconic
acid reductase.
(a) Classical route
to vitamin C. (b) The
simplified route to
2-ketogulonic acid, the
immediate precursor of
vitamin C.

CHO

COOH

OH

O
Endogenous

HO
OH

Erwinia
enzymes

OH
CH2OH
D-glucose

Once a number of polyketide biosynthetic gene
clusters had been cloned and sequenced, new insights
were gained into the mechanism of synthesis and
two enzymic modes of synthesis were discovered. In
particular, polyketide synthesis takes place on an
enzyme complex in a manner analogous to fatty
acid synthesis. Furthermore, there are two types of
complex. In type II complexes, the different enzyme
activities are encoded by separate subunits. By contrast, in type I synthesis all the different enzyme
activities are encoded by a single, very large gene.
The polyketide synthases are prime candidates for
DNA shuffling and this approach has been widely
adopted (Baltz 1998). However, novel polyketides
can also be generated simply by changing the order of
the different activities in type I synthases (McDaniel
et al. 1999).
Metabolic engineering can also be achieved in
plants and plant cells to produce diverse
chemical structures
Plants synthesize an incredibly diverse array of
useful chemicals. Most are products of secondary
metabolism, that is, biochemical pathways that are
not involved in the synthesis of essential cellular

HO

COOH
O

2,5 DKG
reductase
(Corynebacterium)

HO

OH
O
CH2OH
2,5 diketo-Dgluconic acid

OH
HO
CH2OH
2-keto-Lgulonic acid

components but more complex molecules that provide additional functions. Examples of these functions are attraction of pollinators and resistance to
pests and pathogens. In many cases, these secondary
metabolites have specific and potent pharmaceutical
properties in humans: well-known examples include
caffeine, nicotine, morphine, and cocaine.
Plants have long been exploited as a source of
pharmaceutical compounds, and a number of
species are cultivated specifically for the purpose
of extracting drugs and other valuable molecules.
We discussed above how gene transfer to bacteria
and yeast can be used to produce novel chemicals,
so in theory it would be possible to transfer the
necessary components from these useful plants
into microbes for large-scale production. However,
the secondary metabolic pathways of plants are
so extensive and complex, that in most cases such
a strategy would prove impossible. Fortunately,
advances in plant transformation have made it
possible to carry out metabolic engineering in plants
themselves (Capell & Christou 2004), and largescale plant cell cultures can be used in the same
manner as microbial cultures for the production of
important phytochemicals (reviewed by Verpoorte
1998, Verpoorte et al. 2000).

528

CHAPTER 26

O
H3C

CH3

OH

H 3C

O

OH

O

OH
CH3
OH

OH
Sugar

H3 C
O
CH3

CH3

OCH3 O

OH

Sugar

Sugar

O
CH3

Erythromycin

Daunorubicin
OCH3

HO

H3C

OCH3
O

O

CH3

H
H3C

O

CH3

H

O

O

H

H
O

H3 C
O

O

OH

H

CH3
H
CH3

O
CH3

H
OCH3
Avermectin
O
CH3

O
HC

H3C
H3C
O

Sugar
O

Sugar
OH

CH3
Tylosin

Production of vinblastine and vincristine in
Catharanthus cell cultures is a challenge
because of the many steps and control points
in the pathway
The secondary metabolic pathways of most plants
produce the same basic molecular skeletons, but
these are “decorated” with functional groups in a
highly specific way, so that particular compounds
may be found in only one or a few plant species.
Furthermore, such molecules are often produced in
extremely low amounts, so extraction and purification can be expensive. For example, the Madagascar

Fig. 26.5 Some examples of
polyketides.

periwinkle Catharanthus roseus is the source of
two potent anti-cancer drugs called vinblastine and
vincristine. These terpene indole alkaloids are too
complex to synthesize in the laboratory and there are
no alternative natural sources. In C. roseus, these
molecules are produced in such low amounts that
over one hectare of plants must be harvested to produce a single gram of each drug, with a commercial
value of over $1 million.
It would be much more convenient to produce
such drugs in fermentors containing cultured plant
cells, and this has been achieved for a number of
compounds, two of which (paclitaxel and shikonin)

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

H
O

Actinorhodin

O

CH3
O
COOH

O
H
Medermycin

O

N(CH3)2
H
O

HO

H 3C

O

CH3

O

O

H

O

O
O

actVA gene
Mederrhodin

N(CH3)2
H
O

HO

H 3C

O

CH3

O

O

O
H

O

O
O

Fig. 26.6 The formation of the new antibiotic mederrhodin
from medermycin by the actVA gene product.

have reached commercial production (see Verpoorte
et al. 2000). However, cell suspension cultures often
do not produce the downstream products made by
the parent plant. This applies to vinblastine and vincristine from C. roseus, and also to other important
drugs such as morphine, codeine, and hyoscyamine.
Part of the reason for this is the complexity of
secondary metabolism. The entire pathway is not
completed in a single cell, but is often segregated into
different cell types, with consequent shuttling of intermediates between cells. Within the cell, different
stages of the pathway are also compartmentalized,
so that intermediates must be transported between
organelles. As in bacteria, knowledge of the target
biosynthetic pathway is therefore essential for metabolic engineering, but in plants only a few secondary
pathways are understood in sufficient detail. Examples
include the phenylpropanoid and flavonoid pathways, which yield anthocyanins (plant pigments)
and phytoalexins (antimicrobial compounds), and
the terpene indole alkaloid biosynthetic pathway,

529

which generates important alkaloids such as vinblastine and vincristine. As more plant genomes are
sequenced, we are likely to learn much more about
such pathways.
All terpene indole alkaloids derive from a single
universal precursor called strictosidine. This is
formed by the convergence of two pathways, the
iridoid pathway (culminating in secologanin) and
the terpenoid pathway (culminating in tryptamine).
Strictosidine is formed by the condensation of secologanin and tryptamine, catalyzed by the enzyme
strictosidine synthase, and is then further modified
in later steps to produce the valuable downstream
alkaloids (Fig. 26.7). The conversion of tryptophan
to tryptamine is a rate-limiting step in the terpenoid
pathway, and this has been addressed by overexpressing the enzyme tryptophan decarboxylase in
C. roseus cell suspension cultures. However, while
transformed cultures produced much higher levels
of tryptamine, no downstream alkaloids were synthesized (Goddijn et al. 1995, Canel et al. 1998). The
simultaneous overexpression of the next enzyme in
the pathway, strictosidine synthase, did increase the
levels of the alkaloid ajmalicine, a useful sedative, in
some cultures, but did not result in the synthesis of
vinblastine or vincristine (Canel et al. 1998).
It thus seems that single-step engineering may
remove known bottlenecks only to reveal the position of the next. The limited success of single-gene
approaches has resulted in the development of
alternative strategies for the coordinated regulation
of entire pathways using transcription factors. Using
the yeast one-hybrid system (p. 463) a transcription
factor called ORCA2 has been identified that binds
to response elements in the genes for tryptophan
decarboxylase, strictosidine synthase, and several
other genes encoding enzymes in the same pathway.
A related protein, ORCA3, has been identified using
insertional vectors that activate genes adjacent to
their integration site. By bringing the expression of
such transcription factors under the control of the
experimenter, entire metabolic pathways could be
controlled externally (see review by Memelink et al.
2000).
The production of vitamin A in cereals is an
example of extending an endogenous
metabolic pathway
Although the metabolic pathways for vitamin
biosynthesis have been more fully elucidated in
microbes than in plants, the engineering of plants

530

CHAPTER 26

COOH
L-Tryptophan
NH2

N
H
Tryptophan
decarboxylase
(TDC)

O

H

C
H
OGIu

5
Tryptamine

H
N
H

2

NH2

O

CH3OOC

Secologanin

Strictosidine synthase
(SSS)

N
H H

3

NH
H
OGIu

Strictosidine
H
CH3OOC

O

N
H

N
N
H H

H
CH2
H

CH3OOC
Ajmalicine

N

CH3O

O

H

CH3
Vindoline

for enhanced vitamin synthesis is now gaining
much attention (Herbers 2003). Vitamin A, or 11cis-retinal, is a dietary component required in all
human cells but it is particularly important in the
eye, where it functions as the lipid prosthetic group
of the visual pigment opsin. Vitamin A deficiency is a
significant health threat in the developing world,
and is the most common (yet preventable) cause of
blindness in developing countries. Humans usually
obtain vitamin A directly from animal sources, but
can synthesize it if provided with its immediate
precursor, provitamin A (β-carotene), which is present at high levels in certain fruits and vegetables.
The recommended daily allowance of vitamin A
is expressed as retinol equivalents, and is equal to
about 6 mg of β-carotene per day. There is very little
β-carotene in cereal grains, which represent the
staple diet for many of the world’s poorest people.
The synthesis of carotenes in plants begins with
the linkage of two geranylgeranyl diphosphate molecules to form the precursor phytoene (Fig. 26.8). The
conversion of phytoene into β-carotene requires

OH

OAc

COOCH3

Fig. 26.7 Abbreviated pathway of
terpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis,
showing the conversion of
tryptophan into tryptamine by the
enzyme tryptophan decarboxylase,
the condensation of tryptamine
and secologanin into strictosidine,
and the later diversification of
strictosidine into valuable akaloids,
such as ajmalicine and vindoline
(a precursor of both vinblastine and
vincristine).

three further enzymatic steps. All four steps are
absent in cereal endosperm tissue, so cereal grains
accumulate geranylgeranyl diphosphate but not the
downstream metabolic products in the pathway.
The synthesis of β-carotene in cereals therefore represents an example of metabolic pathway extension,
where novel enzymatic activities must be introduced
into the plant and expressed in the endosperm to
extend the pathway beyond its endogenous end
point. The four enzyme activities in the β-carotene
synthesis pathway missing in cereal grains are phytoene synthase, phytoene desaturase, ζ-carotene
desaturase, and lycopene β-cyclase (Fig. 26.8). The
first major breakthrough was the development of
rice grains accumulating phytoene. Burkhardt et al.
(1997) described rice plants transformed with the
daffodil (Narcissus pseudonarcissus) phytoene synthase gene, which accumulated high levels of this
metabolic intermediate. Further work by the same
group (Ye et al. 2000) produced transgenic rice
plants expressing the daffodil genes encoding phytoene synthase and lycopene β-cyclase, and the crtI

531

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

PPO

2 × Geranylgeranyl diphosphate

OPP
Phytoene synthase

Phytoene
Phytoene desaturase
ζ-carotene
ζ-carotene desaturase
Lycopene

Lycopene cyclase

β-carotene

Fig. 26.8

Enzymatic steps and metabolic products in the β-carotene biosynthesis pathway which are missing in cereal grains.

gene from the bacterium Erwinia uredovora, which
encodes an enzyme with both phytoene desaturase
and ζ-carotene desaturase activities. The daffodil
genes were expressed under the control of the rice
glutelin-1 promoter, which is endosperm specific,
while the bacterial gene was controlled by the
constitutive cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S
promoter. This ground-breaking, multi-gene engineering approach resulted in golden colored rice
grains containing up to 2 µg/g of β-carotene, in
which case a moderate rice meal of 100 g would
represent about 10% of the RDA for vitamin A.
Interestingly, similar results were achieved in rice
plants containing phytoene synthase and the bacterial crtI gene but lacking lycopene β-cyclase (Beyer
et al. 2002). This suggested either that rice grains
contain a residual endogenous lycopene β-cyclase
activity or that the endogenous enzyme is dormant
in wild-type grains but induced in the transgenic
grains by the high levels of metabolic intermediates.
The “Golden Rice” project represented not just
a technological breakthrough but also a model of
humanitarian science that serves as an example
for the deployment of other crops addressing food
insecurity. From the beginning, the clear aim of
the project organizers was to maintain freedom to
operate and to provide the technology free of charge
to subsistence farmers in developing countries, a
feat that required careful negotiation over more
than 100 intellectual and technical property rights
(Potrykus 2001). Golden Rice fulfils an urgent need;

it complements traditional interventions for vitamin
A deficiency and provides a real opportunity to
address a significant world health problem. It was
developed to benefit the poor and disadvantaged,
and will be given away to subsistence farmers with
no attached conditions. It requires no additional
inputs compared with other rice varieties. To avoid
biosafety concerns, Golden Rice lines have been
generated with the innocuous metabolic selection
marker mpi, which allows regenerating plants to
grow when mannose is the only carbon source and
avoids the use of antibiotics or herbicides for selection (Lucca et al. 2001).
While β-carotene synthesis in rice has the greatest
potential to address real food security and health
problems, experiments in other plants have revealed
further useful information about this important
metabolic pathway. Transgenic tomatoes have been
described expressing E. uredovora phytoene synthase
(crtB) (Fraser et al. 2000) and crtI (Romer et al. 2000)
as well as a β-cyclase gene from Arabidopsis thaliana
(Rosati et al. 2000). In the first case, fruit-specific
expression of crtB was achieved using the tomato
polygalacturonase promoter, and the recombinant
protein was directed to the chromoplasts using the
tomato phytoene synthase-1 transit sequence. Total
fruit carotenoids were found to be two- to four-fold
higher than in wild-type plants. Romer et al. (2000)
expressed crtI constitutively, under the control of the
CaMV 35S promoter. This unexpectedly reduced the
total carotene content by about 50% but the levels

532

CHAPTER 26

of β-carotene increased threefold to 520 µg/g dry
weight. This probably reflects the existence of complex feedback mechanisms acting at several different
levels, a possibility discussed in detail by Giuliano
et al. (2000). Rosati et al. (2000) used the fruitspecific tomato phytoene desaturase promoter to
express the A. thaliana β-lycopene cyclase gene and
increased β-carotene levels in transgenic fruits to
60 µg/g fresh weight. Work is ongoing to determine
how the β-carotene pathway is regulated and what
steps need to be taken to overcome feedback control.
The enhancement of plants to produce more
vitamin E is an example of balancing several
metabolic pathways and directing flux in the
preferred direction
Vitamin E is actually a group of eight hydrophobic
compounds: α-, β-, γ-, and δ-tocopherol, and the
unsaturated equivalents α-, β-, γ-, and δ-tocotrienol.
Dietary vitamin E is obtained mainly from seeds, and
its function in the body is to prevent the oxidation
and polymerization of unsaturated fatty acids.
Deficiency leads to general wasting, kidney degeneration, and infertility. The α-, β-, γ-, and δ-derivatives
differ in the number and position of methyl groups
around the chroman ring as shown in Fig. 26.9.
The most potent vitamer is RRR-α-tocopherol, but

R1
HO

O

R2
R3

Tocopherols

R1
HO

O

R2
R3

Tocotrienols

Fig. 26.9 Structure of vitamin E. For α derivatives,
R1, 2, and 3 are methylated. For β derivatives, R1 and 3
are methylated. For γ derivatives, R2 and 3 are methylated.
For δ derivatives, only R3 is methylated.

common dietary sources of natural vitamin E such as
soy oil are much richer in γ-tocopherol, which has
only 10% of the activity of α-tocopherol, while αtocopherol itself is only a minor component. Natural
vitamin E supplements, which account for 10–15%
of the total vitamin E market, are produced mainly
from soy oil by chemically converting γ-tocopherol
to α-tocopherol (Subramanian et al. 2000).
Tocopherol synthesis in plants requires the input
from two metabolic pathways. The shikimate pathway generates homogentisic acid, which forms the
aromatic ring of the compound, whereas the side
chain is derived from phytyldiphosphate, a product
of the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway
(Fig. 26.10). These precursors are joined together
by the enzyme homogentisic acid prenyltransferase (HPT) to form the intermediate 2-methyl-6phytylbenzoquinol (MPBQ). MPBQ is the substrate
for two enzymes, tocopherol cyclase and MPBQ
methyltransferase. The former enzyme produces
δ-tocopherol while the latter introduces a second
methyl group to form 2,3-dimethyl-5-phytylbenzoquinol. The action of tocopherol cyclase on this
intermediate produces γ-tocopherol. Both γ-tocopherol and δ-tocopherol act as substrates for the
enzyme γ-tocopherol methyltransferase (γ-TMT),
producing α- and β-tocopherol, respectively. The
relative abundance of the four tocopherols in different plants is dependent on the activities of the
enzymes discussed above.
Recent work carried out using the model plant A.
thaliana has shown how the levels of vitamin E activity can be increased in the seeds of this plant, either
by increasing the total amount of vitamin E or by
shifting the vitamer profile towards the most potent
form, α-tocopherol. Shintani & Della Penna (1998)
expressed the Synechocystis PCC6803 and A. thaliana
genes encoding γ-TMT in A. thaliana seeds using the
carrot seed-specific DC3 promoter. This resulted in a
radical shift from γ- to α-tocopherol (and from δ- to
β-tocopherol) showing that nutritional enhancement in plants was possible without altering total
vitamin E levels. In contrast, Savidge et al. (2002)
overexpressed A. thaliana HPT, producing twice the
level of vitamin E found in normal seeds, while
Geiger et al. (2001) expressed the E. coli tyrA gene,
which encodes a dual-function enzyme (chorismate
mutase and prephenate dehydrogenase), resulting
in up to three times the normal level of vitamin E.
A more recent study has shown how the results
obtained from experiments in A. thaliana can be used
to produce soybean crops with enhanced nutritional

533

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

MEP
pathway

Shikimate
pathway

Homogentisic acid

Phytyldiphosphate
Homogentisic acid

HO

H
OH

CH3
MPBQ
2-methyl-6-phytylbenzoquinol
methyltransferase
Tocopherol cyclase

HO

H
CH3

OH

HO

3

H

CH3
2,3-dimethyl-5-phytylbenzoquinol

O

3

CH3 δ-tocopherol

Tocopherol cyclase
HO

γ-tocopherol methyltransferase
H

CH3

3

O

β-tocopherol

3

CH3 γ-tocopherol
γ-tocopherol methyltransferase
α-tocopherol

Fig. 26.10

Late steps in tocopherol biosynthesis. MPBQ = 2-methyl-6-phytylbenzoquinol.

properties that have the real potential to address
food and nutritional insecurity. As for Golden Rice,
the success of this study relied on the simultaneous
expression of multiple genes, in this case the A.
thaliana VTE3 and VTE4 genes, encoding MPBQ
methyltransferase and γ-tocopherol methyltransferase (Van Eenennaam et al. 2003). The transgenic
soybeans showed a significant elevation in the total
amount of vitamin E activity (five-fold greater than
wild-type plants), which was attributable mainly to
an eight-fold increase in the levels of α-tocopherol,
from its normal 10% of total vitamin E to over 95%.
In this case, multiple gene transfer was used not
to extend a metabolic pathway, but to regulate
the existing steps to increase flux toward desired
metabolites.

or breeder relies on chance recombination events
to bring together beneficial combinations of genes
when particular crosses are performed. Genetic
engineering provides a short cut to conventional
breeding, by introducing such genes directly into
the genome. Genetic engineering also removes the
constraints of sexual compatibility when carrying
out crosses, since genes from any source (bacteria,
animals, and plants) can be transferred into the recipient organism. Nowhere are the benefits of genetic
engineering for trait improvement more apparent
than in plant biotechnology, given that commercial
genetically modified (GM) crops now cover over
75 million hectares of farmland in over 20 countries
(Christou & Twyman 2004). In this section we discuss some of the agronomic traits in plants that have
been improved by genetic manipulation.

Theme 2: Improving agronomic traits by
genetic modification

Herbicide resistance is the most widespread
trait in commercial transgenic plants

For centuries, plants and domestic animals have
been bred to select the most desirable traits, either in
terms of their appearance, hardiness, or yield of useful products. In conventional breeding, the farmer

Herbicides are used to kill weeds, and generally affect
processes that are unique to plants, e.g. photosynthesis or amino acid biosynthesis (see Table 26.5).
Both crops and weeds share these processes, and

534

CHAPTER 26

Table 26.5 Mode of action of herbicides and method of engineering herbicide-resistant plants.

Herbicide

Pathway inhibited

Target enzyme Basis of engineered resistance to herbicide

Glyphosate

Aromatic amino acid
biosynthesis

5-Enol-pyruvyl
shikimate-3phosphate
(EPSP) synthase

Overexpression of plant EPSP gene or
introduction of bacterial glyphosate-resistant
aroA gene

Sulfonylurea

Branched-chain
amino acid
biosynthesis

Acetolactate
synthase (ALS)

Introduction of resistant ALS gene

Imidazolinones

Branched-chain
amino acid
biosynthesis

ALS

Introduction of mutant ALS gene

Phosphinothricin

Glutamine
biosynthesis

Glutamine
synthetase

Overexpression of glutamine synthetase or
introduction of the bar gene, which detoxifies
the herbicide

Atrazine

Photosystem II

QB

Introduction of mutant gene for QB protein or
introduction of gene for glutathione-Stransferase, which can detoxify atrazines

Bromoxynil

Photosynthesis

developing herbicides that are selective for weeds is
very difficult. An alternative approach is to modify
crop plants so that they become resistant to broadspectrum herbicides, i.e. incorporating selectivity
into the plant itself rather than relying on the selectivity of the chemical. Two strategies to engineer
herbicide resistance have been adopted. In the first,
the target molecule in the cell either is rendered
insensitive or is overproduced. In the second, a
pathway that degrades or detoxifies the herbicide
is introduced into the plant. An example of each
strategy is considered below.
Glyphosate is a non-selective herbicide that inhibits
5-enol-pyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate (EPSP) synthase, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of aromatic
amino acids in plants and bacteria. A glyphosatetolerant Petunia hybrida cell line obtained after
selection for glyphosate resistance was found to
overproduce EPSP synthase as a result of gene
amplification. A gene encoding the enzyme was subsequently isolated and introduced into petunia plants
under the control of a CaMV promoter. Transgenic
plants expressed increased levels of EPSP synthase
in their chloroplasts and were significantly more
tolerant to glyphosate (Shah et al. 1986). An alternative approach to glyphosate resistance has been to

Introduction of nitrilase gene, which detoxifies
bromoxynil

introduce a gene encoding a mutant EPSP synthase.
This mutant enzyme retains its specific activity but
has decreased affinity for the herbicide. Transgenic tomato plants expressing this gene under the
control of an opine promoter were also glyphosate
tolerant (Comai et al. 1985). Following on from
this early research, several companies have introduced glyphosate tolerance into a range of crop
species, with soybean and cotton the first to reach
commercialization (Padgette et al. 1996, Nida et al.
1996). Currently, nearly three-quarters of all transgenic plants in the world are resistant to glyphosate
(James 2004).
Phosphinothricin (PPT) is an irreversible inhibitor
of glutamine synthetase in plants and bacteria.
Bialaphos, produced by Streptomyces hygroscopicus,
consists of PPT and two alanine residues. When these
residues are removed by peptidases the herbicidal
component PPT is released. To prevent self-inhibition
of growth, bialaphos-producing strains of S. hygroscopicus also produce the enzyme phosphinothricin
acetyltransferase (PAT), which inactivates PPT by
acetylation. The bar gene that encodes the acetylase
has been introduced into potato, tobacco, and tomato
cells using Agrobacterium-mediated transformation.
The resultant plants were resistant to commercial

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

(a)

(b)

Fig. 26.11 Evaluation of phosphinothricin resistance
in transgenic tobacco plants under field conditions.
(a) Untransformed control plants. (b) Transgenic plants.
(Photographs courtesy of Dr. J. Botterman and the editor
of Biotechnology.)

formulations of PPT and bialaphos in the laboratory
(De Block et al. 1987) and in the field (De Greef et al.
1989) (Fig. 26.11). More recently, it has been shown
that bialaphos-resistant transgenic rice plants which
were inoculated with the fungi causing sheath blight
disease and subsequently treated with the herbicide
were completely protected from infection (Uchimiya
et al. 1993). This agronomically important result
depends on the observation that bialaphos is toxic
to fungi as well as being a herbicide. PPT resistance
is widely used in plants as a selectable marker (see
p. 284), however, it has also been introduced into a
number of different crops for weed control, including
sugarcane and rice (Gallo-Meagher & Irvine 1996,
Oard et al. 1996).
The benefit of herbicide-resistant transgenic crops
is the increased yield and seed quality as competing
weed species are eliminated. However, there was
initial concern that this would come with an associated penalty of increased herbicide use, which could
have a serious impact on the environment. Contrary
to these predictions, the introduction of herbicideresistant plants has actually reduced chemical use
by up to 80% in many areas, as farmers adopt better
weed-control policies and switch to herbicides with

535

low-use rates. A further risk is that transgenes for
herbicide tolerance could spread to weed species,
resulting in a new breed of “superweeds” (Kling
1996). It is too early to say whether this will be a
problem. Although a range of herbicide-resistant
transgenic crops is being tested, only crops resistant
to glyphosate or bromoxynil are currently grown
on a commercial scale. The benefits and risks of
herbicide-resistant crops have been reviewed (Gressel
1999, 2000). Although herbicide resistance is the
most common strategy for weed control, several
others are being evaluated including enhanced
allelopathy, in which crop plants are modified to
produce their own weed-inhibiting compounds
(reviewed by Duke et al. 2002). Typically, the primary crop is the target of modification, but such
approaches can also be used to produce aggressive
“cover crops” that inhibit weeds before the primary
crop is planted. There has been recent interest in the
use of suicide transgenes inducible by temperature
or photoperiod cues to cause cover crops to selfdestruct at the correct time of year (Stanilaus &
Cheng 2002). It is also possible to modify microbial
pathogens so that they preferentially attack weeds
(e.g. Amsellum et al. 2002).
Virus-resistant crops can be produced by
expressing viral or non-viral transgenes
Major crop losses occur every year as a result of viral
infections, e.g. tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) causes
losses of over $50 million per annum in the tomato
industry. There is a useful phenomenon known as
cross-protection in which infection of a plant with
one strain of virus protects against superinfection
with a second, related strain. The mechanism of
cross-protection is not fully understood but it is
believed that the viral coat protein is important.
Powell-Abel et al. (1986) developed transgenic
plants which express the TMV coat protein and
which greatly reduced disease symptoms following
virus infection. Since that observation, the principle
of heterologous coat protein expression has been
extended to many different plants and viruses
(reviewed by Beachy et al. 1990). In the case of resistance to TMV, the coat protein must be expressed in
the epidermis and in the vascular tissue through
which the virus spreads systemically (Clark et al.
1990). Transgenic squash containing multiple viral
coat protein genes and demonstrating resistance to
cucumber mosaic virus, watermelon mosaic virus
2, and zucchini yellow mosaic virus was the first

536

CHAPTER 26

virus-resistant transgenic crop to reach commercial
production (Tricoli et al. 1995). A related strategy in
which viral replicase was expressed in transgenic
rice plants protected those plants from several different isolates of rice yellow mottle virus (RYMV)
because the replicase was more conserved than the
coat protein. In the best-performing lines, viral replication was completely blocked over several generations (Pinto et al. 1999).
While the heterologous coat protein approach
can be successful, it has been demonstrated that, in
many cases, the effect of transgene expression is
mediated at the RNA rather than the protein level.
This can be proven by generating transgenic plants
carrying coat protein genes that cannot be translated to yield functional proteins, as first shown by
Lindbo and Dougherty (1992) using the tobacco
etch virus coat protein gene. The transgene RNA
apparently interferes with viral replication (a phenomenon called RNA-mediated viral resistance,
RMVR). This requires homology between the transgene and the target virus, and involves high-level
transgene transcription but low-level accumulation
of the transcript, features very similar to those of
post-transcriptional gene silencing (p. 314).
A different method of minimizing the effects of
plant virus infection was developed by Gehrlach
et al. (1987). They generated plants that expressed
the satellite RNA of tobacco ringspot virus and
such plants were resistant to infection with tobacco
ringspot virus itself. Another potential method of
inducing resistance to viruses is the production
of antiviral proteins in transgenic plants. American
pokeweed produces an antiviral protein called
dianthrin that functions as a ribosome-inactivating
protein. The cDNA for this protein has been cloned
(Lin et al. 1991) and expressed in tobacco, providing
resistance against African cassava mosaic virus
(ACMV) (Hong et al. 1996). Interestingly in this
experiment, the dianthrin gene was expressed under
the control of an ACMV promoter, such that the
antiviral protein was expressed only upon viral
infection. In this manner, the toxic effects of constitutive transgene expression were avoided.
Several further classes of non-viral gene products
can be used to provide specific protection against
viruses, including ribosome-inactivating proteins,
which block protein synthesis (Moons et al. 1997,
Tumer et al. 1997), ribonucleases, which destroy the
virus genome (Watanabe et al. 1995), 2′,5′ oligoadenylate synthetases, which interfere with replication
(Ogawa et al. 1996), and ribozymes, which cleave

viral genomes causing them to be degraded by cellular enzymes (de Feyter et al. 1996, Kwon et al. 1997).
Antibodies specific for virion proteins have also been
used to protect plants from viruses. In the first
demonstration of this approach, Tavladoraki et al.
(1993) expressed a single chain Fv fragment (scFV)
specific for ACMV in transgenic N. benthamiana, and
demonstrated resistance to viral infection. Other
groups have generated transgenic tobacco plants
expressing antibodies specific for tobacco mosaic
virus, resulting in reduced infectivity. Voss et al.
(1995) expressed full-size IgG immunoglobulins
while Zimmermann et al. (1998) expressed scFv
fragments. Targeting scFv fragments to the plasma
membrane also provides protection against virus
infection (Schillberg et al. 2001).
Resistance to fungal pathogens is often
achieved by manipulating natural plant
defense mechanisms
Progress also has been made in developing resistance to fungal pathogens, which are traditionally
controlled by appropriate farming practices (e.g.
crop rotation) and the application of expensive and
environmentally harmful fungicides. A straightforward approach is to engineer plants with antifungal
proteins from heterologous species. This was first
demonstrated by Broglie et al. (1991), who showed
that expression of bean chitinase can protect tobacco
and oilseed rape from post-emergent damping off
caused by Rhizoctonia solani. Plants synthesize a wide
range of so-called “pathogenesis-related proteins”
(PR proteins), such as chitinases and glucanases,
which are induced by microbial infection and there
are now many examples of such proteins expressed
in plants to provide protection against fungi – in
some cases multiple PR proteins have been expressed
with synergistic effects: tobacco, carrot, and tomato
have each been engineered to express both chitinase
and glucanase simultaneously, and these plants
show greater fungal resistance, indicating that the
two enzymes can work synergistically (van den
Elzen et al. 1993, Zhu et al. 1994, Jongedijk et al.
1995).
Plants also synthesize anti-fungal peptides called
defensins, and other anti-fungal proteins that have
been shown to confer resistance to pathogens when
overexpressed in transgenic plants (Cary et al. 2000,
Osusky et al. 2000, Li et al. 2001); some of these have
been shown to provide protection under field trial
conditions (Gao et al. 2000). As the genes for more of

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

these proteins have been cloned and characterized,
the number of transgenic plants constitutively
expressing such proteins continues to rise (Punja
2001). For example, tobacco osmotin has been
expressed in transgenic potato, providing resistance
to Phytophthora infestans (Liu et al. 1994), and in
transgenic rice, providing resistance to R. solani (Lin
et al. 1995). Instead of using a protein to provide
direct protection, a metabolic engineering strategy
can be utilized. Phytoallexins are alkaloids with antifungal activity, and transforming plants with genes
encoding the appropriate biosynthetic enzymes can
increase their synthesis. Hain et al. (1993) generated
tomato plants expressing the grapevine gene for
stilbene synthase, and these plants demonstrated
increased resistance to infection by Botrytis cinerea.
The grape stilbene synthase (resveratrol synthase)
gene has since been expressed in tobacco, tomato,
barley, rice, and wheat, and has been shown to confer resistance to a range of fungal pathogens (StarkLorenzen et al. 1997, Thomzik et al. 1997, Leckband
& Lorz 1998, Fettig & Hess 1999).
An alternative to the use of anti-fungal proteins or
metabolites is to manipulate the hypersensitive response, which is a physiological defense mechanism
used by plants to repel attacking pathogens. Resistance occurs only in plants carrying a resistance
gene (R) that corresponds to an avirulence (avr) gene
in the pathogen. Elicitors (signaling molecules) released by pathogens are detected by the plant and
activate a range of defense responses, including cell
death, PR-gene expression, phytoallexin synthesis,
and the deposition of cellulose at the site of invasion,
forming a physical barrier. Importantly, the hypersensitive response is systemic, so that neighboring
cells can pre-empt pathogen invasion. A recently
developed strategy is to transfer avirulence genes
from the pathogen to the plant, under the control
of a pathogen-inducible promoter. This has been
demonstrated in tomato plants transformed with
the avr9 gene from Clasopsporium fulvum, resulting
in resistance to a range of fungal, bacterial, and viral
diseases (Keller et al. 1999, reviewed by Melchers
& Stuiver 2000).
Resistance to blight provides an example of
how plants can be protected against bacterial
pathogens
Bacterial diseases cause significant losses in crop
yields, and many different transgenic strategies have
been developed to prevent infection or reduce the

537

severity of symptoms (Herrera-Estrella & Simpson
1995, Mourges et al. 1998, Punja 2001). One of the
most prevalent bacterial diseases of rice is bacterial
blight, which causes losses totaling over $250 million every year in Asia alone. This disease has
received a great deal of attention due to the discovery
of a resistance gene complex in the related wild
species O. longistaminata. The trait was introgressed
into cultivated rice line IR-24 and was shown to
confer resistance to all known isolates of the blight
pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in India
and the Philippines (Khush et al. 1990). Further
investigation of the resistance complex resulted in
the isolation of a gene, named Xa21, encoding a
receptor tyrosine kinase (Song et al. 1995). The
transfer of this gene to susceptible rice varieties
resulted in plant lines showing strong resistance to a
range of isolates of the pathogen (Wang et al. 1996,
Tu et al. 1998, Zhang et al. 1998). The Xa21 gene
has been stacked with two genes for insect resistance
to generate a rice line with resistance to bacterial
blight and a range of insect pests, and this is due
for commercial release in China in the near future
(Huang et al. 2002a). As with insect-resistance genes,
the widespread use of transgenic plants carrying a
single resistance factor could prompt the evolution
of new pathogen strains with counteradaptive properties. Therefore, other blight-resistance transgenes
are being tested for possible deployment either alone
or in combination with Xa21. For example, Tang
et al. (2001) have produced rice plants expressing
a ferredoxin-like protein that had previously been
shown to delay the hypersensitive response to the
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae. In inoculation tests with X. oryzae pv. oryzae, all the transgenic plants showed enhanced resistance against
the pathogen.
The bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis provides
the major source of insect-resistant genes
Insect pests represent one of the most serious biotic
constraints to crop production. For example, more
than one-quarter of all the rice grown in the world
is lost to insect pests, at an estimated cost of nearly
$50 billion. This is despite an annual expenditure
of approximately $1.5 billion on insecticides for this
crop alone. Insect-resistant plants are therefore desirable not only because of the potential increased yields,
but also because the need for insecticides is eliminated and, following on from this, the undesirable
accumulation of such chemicals in the environment

538

CHAPTER 26

is avoided. Typical insecticides are non-selective, so
they kill harmless and beneficial insects as well as
pests. For these reasons, transgenic plants have been
generated expressing toxins that are selective for
particular insect species.
Research is being carried out on a wide range of
insecticidal proteins from diverse sources. However,
all commercially produced insect-resistant transgenic
crops express toxin proteins from the Gram-positive
bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) (Peferoen et al.
1997, de Maagd et al. 1999). Unlike other Bacillus
species, B. thuringiensis produces crystals during
sporulation, comprising one or a small number of
~130 kDa protoxins called crystal proteins. These
proteins are potent and highly specific insecticides.
The specificity reflects interactions between the
crystal proteins and receptors in the insect midgut.
In susceptible species, ingested crystals dissolve in
the alkaline conditions of the gut and the protoxins
are activated by gut proteases. The active toxins
bind to receptors on midgut epithelial cells, become
inserted into the plasma membrane, and form pores
that lead to cell death (and eventual insect death)
through osmotic lysis. Approximately 150 distinct
Bt toxins have been identified and each shows a
unique spectrum of activity (van Frankenhuyzen &
Nystrom 2002).
Bt toxins have been used as topical insecticides
since the 1930s, but never gained widespread use
because they are rapidly broken down on exposure
to daylight, and thus have to be applied several times
during a growing season. Additionally, only insects
infesting the exposed surfaces of sprayed plants are
killed. These problems have been addressed by the
expression of crystal proteins in transgenic plants. Bt
genes were initially introduced into tomato (Fischhoff
et al. 1987) and tobacco (Vaeck et al. 1987, Barton
et al. 1987) and later cotton (Perlak et al. 1990)
resulting in the production of insecticidal proteins
that protected the plants from insect infestation.
However, field tests of these plants revealed that
higher levels of the toxin in the plant tissue would
be required to obtain commercially useful plants
(Delannay et al. 1989). Attempts to increase the
expression of the toxin gene in plants by the use
of different promoters, fusion proteins, and leader
sequences were not successful. However, examination of the bacterial cry1Ab and cry1Ac genes
indicated that they differed significantly from plant
genes in a number of ways (Perlak et al. 1991).
For example, localized AT rich regions resembling
plant introns, potential plant polyadenylation signal

sequences, ATTTA sequences which can destabilize
mRNA, and rare plant codons were all found. The
elimination of undesirable sequences and modifications to bring codon usage into line with the host
species resulted in greatly enhanced expression of
the insecticidal toxin and strong insect resistance of
the transgenic plants in field tests (Koziel et al. 1993).
By carrying out such enhancements, Perlak and
colleagues expressed a modified cry3A gene in potato
to provide resistance against Colorado beetle (Perlak
et al. 1993). In 1995, this crop became the first
transgenic insect-resistant crop to reach commercial production, as NewLeaf™ potato marketed by
Monsanto. The same company also released the first
commercial transgenic, insect-resistant varieties of
cotton (Bollgard™, expressing cry1Ac and protected
against tobacco bollworm) and maize (YieldGard™,
expressing cry1Ab and resistant to the European
corn borer). Many other biotechnology companies
have now produced Bt-transgenic crop plants resistant to a range of insects (reviewed by Schuler et al.
1998, de Maagd et al. 1999, Hilder & Boulter 1999,
Llewellyn & Higgins 2002). Some of these have been
extraordinarily successful: for example, Tu et al.
(2000) showed that a Bt commercial hybrid variety
expressing the cry1Ab gene produced a 28% yield
increase compared to wild-type plants in field trials
in China.
Although Bt-transgenic plants currently dominate
the market, there are many alternative insecticidal
proteins under investigation. Two types of protein
are being studied in particular: proteins that inhibit
digestive enzymes in the insect gut (proteinase
and amylase inhibitors) and lectins (carbohydratebinding proteins). Research into these alternatives is
driven in part by the fact that some insects are not
affected by any of the known Bt crystal proteins.
Homopteran insects, mostly sap-sucking pests such
as planthoppers, fall into this category, but have
been shown to be susceptible to lectins such as
Galanthus nivalis agglutinin (GNA). This lectin has
been expressed in many crops, including potato (Shi
et al. 1994, Gatehouse et al. 1996), rice (BanoMaqbool & Christou 1999), tomato and tobacco
(reviewed by Schuler et al. 1998).
Drought resistance provides a good example
of how plants can be protected against
abiotic stress
After pests and diseases, unfavorable environmental
conditions (abiotic stresses) represent the next major

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

limitation on crop production. One of the most
prevalent of these conditions is drought, and the
development of transgenic crops with built-in
drought resistance could increase the global yield of
food by up to 30%. Many plants respond to drought
(prolonged dehydration) and increased salinity by
synthesizing small, very soluble molecules such
as betaines, sugars, amino acids, and polyamines.
These are collectively termed compatible solutes, and
they increase the osmotic potential within the plant,
therefore preventing water loss in the short term
and helping to maintain a normal physiological
ion balance in the longer term (Yancey et al. 1982).
Compatible solutes are non-toxic even at high
concentrations, so one strategy to provide drought
resistance is to make such molecules accumulate
in transgenic plants (Chen & Murata 2002, Serraj
& Sinclair 2002). For example, several species have
been engineered to produce higher levels of glycine
betaine but in most cases the levels achieved have
fallen short of the 5–40 µmol/g fresh weight observed
in plants that naturally accumulate this molecule
under salt stress conditions (Sakamoto & Murata
2000, 2001). However, transgenic rice plants expressing BADH (beatine aldehyde dehdrogenase), one of
the key enzymes in the glycine betaine synthesis
pathway, accumulated the molecule to levels in
excess of 5 µmol/g fresh weight (Sakamoto et al.
1998). In China, transgenic rice plants expressing
BADH are likely to be the first commercially released
GM plants developed for abiotic stress tolerance,
and will be available for small-scale subsistence
farmers and large producers (Huang et al. 2002b).
As well as compatible solutes, plants also produce
osmoprotectant proteins known as dehydrins in
response to drought and salinity stress. The overexpression of such proteins offers another strategy
to generate drought-tolerant crop varieties. Xu
et al. (1996) expressed the barley dehydrin HVA1
in transgenic rice, and the transgenic plants were
shown to be resistant to water deficit and salt
stress. More recently, several wheat dehydrins
have been expressed in transgenic rice and have
also been shown to increase dehydration tolerance
(Cheng et al. 2001, 2002).
Plants can be engineered to cope with poor
soil quality
About 65% of the world’s potential arable land
consists of marginal soils, which are characterized
by extremes of pH, limited nutrient availability

539

(particularly phosphorus and iron), and high levels
of toxic metal ions (Marshner 1995). Acidic soils,
which account for 40% of the arable land, have low
levels of available phosphorus and iron but high
levels of aluminum. In an acidic environment, both
iron and aluminum sequester phosphorus into
insoluble or poorly soluble molecules. Aluminum is
also toxic in its own right, its major effect being the
inhibition of root development. Alkaline soils account
for 25% of arable land. The major problem in alkaline soils is the high level of calcium and magnesium
ions, which also sequester phosphorus into insoluble
and sparingly soluble molecules. Calcium is an
essential signaling molecule in plants and high levels
of this metal ion can interfere with normal plant
growth and metabolism. Despite these problems,
many plants have adapted to grow in marginal soils
and some tolerant varieties of crop plants have also
been produced by mutation and conventional breeding. A common factor among these tolerant plants
is the increased exudation of organic acids, such as
citrate, malate, and oxalate, from the roots. These
substances concentrate in the rhizosphere and are
thought to have a number of protective effects, including the displacement and solubilization of phosphorus and iron, the chelation of aluminum, and the
attraction to the rhizosphere of beneficial microorganisms, which may also enhance nutrient availability
(Lopez-Bucio et al. 2000b). The production of transgenic crop plants engineered to exude higher levels
of organic acids is therefore an attractive strategy
to increase the use of marginal soils. Several species
have been transformed with bacterial or plant citrate
synthase genes to increase organic acid production
and induce tolerance of poor soils (de la Fuenete &
Herrera-Estrella 1997, Koyoma et al. 2000, LopezBucio et al. 2000a). The analysis of root extracts
by HPLC showed that citrate levels were 10 times
higher than normal, but more importantly, the
levels of citrate recorded in root exudates were four
times the normal level. These plants could grow
in the presence of aluminum ions at 10 times the
concentration sufficient to suppress the growth of
non-transformed plants, and there was no evidence
of aluminum-induced root damage. The transgenic
plants also performed better in alkaline soils. They
grew and flowered normally and produced seeds,
whereas control plants showed restricted vegetal
growth and failed to produce flowers or seeds (LopezBucio et al. 2000a). The exudation of phytase from
the roots of transgenic plants can be used to release
phosphorus locked away in organic compounds,

540

CHAPTER 26

since much of the organic phosphorus in soil is present as phytate (Hayes et al. 1999). Initial experiments with Arabidopsis plants secreting phytase from
the roots showed that the transgenic plants were
able to grow much better than control plants on
phytate medium. The development of crop plants
that secrete phytase and organic acids is therefore an
important goal for the future.
One of the most important goals in plant
biotechnology is to increase food yields
The amount of usable food obtained from a field
of plants can vary tremendously, and much effort
has been expended in attempts to increase yields
by conventional breeding and optimizing farming
practices. Genetic engineering provides a wide range
of strategies not only for reducing yield losses (by
increasing resistance to pests and diseases and providing tolerance to abiotic stress) but also by increasing the intrinsic yield potential of the plants. In terms
of yield enhancement, photosynthesis is perhaps
the most obvious target for genetic intervention
because it determines the rate of carbon fixation, and
therefore the overall size of the organic carbon pool.
Strategies for increasing photosynthetic activity
include the modification of light-harvesting phytochromes and key photosynthetic enzymes. Progress
has been made in crop species by attempting to
introduce components of the energy-efficient C4
photosynthetic pathway into C3 plants, which lose
a proportion of their fixed carbon through photorespiration. The key step in C4 photosynthesis is
the conversion of CO2 into C4 organic acids by the
enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC)
in mesophyll cells. The maize gene encoding PEPC
has been transferred into several C3 crops, including
potato (Ishimaru et al. 1998) and rice (Matsuoka
et al. 1998, Ku et al. 1999) in order to increase the
overall level of carbon fixation. Transgenic rice plants
were also produced expressing pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase (PPDK) and NADP-malic enzyme
(Ku et al. 2000). Preliminary field trials in China and
Korea demonstrated 10–30% and 30–35% yield
increases for PEPC and PPDK transgenic rice plants,
respectively, which was quite unexpected since only
one C4 enzyme was expressed in each case.
Metabolic approaches to increase overall yields
focus on the conversion of sugars, representing the
direct products of photosynthesis, to the bioavailable storage carbohydrate starch. Several different
strategies have been attempted, including the mani-

pulation of enzyme activity and regulation in source
tissues to increase the carbon flux to sink tissues
(Paul et al. 2001), increasing the efficiency of sugar
transport to sink tissues (Rosche et al. 2002), and the
manipulation of enzyme activity in the sink tissue
itself to increase the conversion of photoassimilates
into starch. Transgenic approaches to increase sugar
to starch conversion have focused primarily on the
manipulation of the plastidial starch synthesis pathway. For example, inhibition of the plastidial adenylate
kinase in transgenic potatoes resulted in a substantial increase in the level of adenylates and a 60%
increase in the level of starch, in combination with a
40% increase in tuber yield (Regierer et al. 2002).
Other strategies that have been used include the
modification of plant architecture to divert resources
to harvestable products. In rice, manipulation of the
gibberellin signaling pathway by overexpression of a
mutant Arabidopsis GAI gene was sufficient to induce
a dominant semi-dwarfing phenotype (Peng et al.
1999, Fu et al. 2001). Developmental genes have been
expressed in an attempt to increase the number of
spikelets (seed-bearing structures) in maize (Cacharrón
et al. 1999) while other researchers have attempted
to modify the way plants respond to day length or
seasonal cues to induce early flowering and increase
the number of harvestable crops each year.

Theme 3: Using genetic modification to
study, prevent, and cure disease
Transgenic animals can be created as models
of human disease
Mammals have been used as models for human
disease for many years, since they can be exploited to
carry out detailed analyses of the molecular basis of
disease and to test newly developed therapeutics
prior to clinical trials in humans. Before the advent of
transgenic animal technology, however, models of
inherited diseases (i.e. diseases with a genetic basis)
were difficult to come by. They could be obtained as
spontaneously occurring mutants, suitable mutant
animals identified in mutagenesis screens, and susceptible animal strains obtained by selective breeding.
Gene manipulation now offers a range of alternative
strategies to create specific disease models (see reviews
by Smithies 1993, Bedell et al. 1997, Petters &
Sommer 2000).
Some of the earliest transgenic disease models
were mice predisposed to particular forms of cancer

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

because the germ line contained exogenously derived
oncogenes (e.g. Sinn et al. 1987). This exemplifies
so-called gain-of-function diseases, which are caused
by a dominantly acting allele and can be modeled
simply by adding that allele to the normal genome,
e.g. by microinjection into eggs. Other gain-offunction diseases that have been modeled in this
way include Gerstmann–Straussler–Scheinker (GSS)
syndrome, a neurodegenerative disease caused by a
dominantly acting mutated prion protein gene. In
one patient suffering from this disease, a mutation
was identified in codon 102 of the prion protein gene.
Transgenic mice were created carrying this mutant
form of the gene in addition to the wild-type locus,
and were shown to develop a similar neurodegenerative pathology to their human counterparts (Hsiao
et al. 1990). Other examples of gain-of-function disease models include Alzheimer’s disease, which was
modeled by overexpression of the amyloid precursor
protein (Quon et al. 1991), and the triplet repeat disorder spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (Burright et al.
1995). Simple transgene addition can also be used to
model diseases caused by dominant negative alleles,
as shown for the premature aging disease, Werner’s
syndrome (Wang et al. 2000).
Recessively inherited diseases are generally caused
by loss of function, and these can be modeled by
gene knockout. The earliest report of this strategy
was a mouse model for HRPT deficiency, generated
by disrupting the gene for hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase (Kuehn et al. 1987). A
large number of genes has been modeled in this way,
including cystic fibrosis (Snouwaert et al. 1992, Dorin
et al. 1992), fragile-X syndrome (Dutch-Belgian
Fragile X Consortium 1994), β-thallasemia (Skow
et al. 1983, Ciavatti et al. 1995), and mitochondrial
cardiomyopathy (Li et al. 2000). Gene targeting has
been widely used to model human cancers caused
by the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes such
as TP53 and RB1 (reviewed by Ghebranious &
Donehower 1998, Macleod & Jacks 1999).
While the studies above provide models of single
gene defects in humans, attention is now shifting
towards the modeling of more complex diseases that
involve multiple genes. This is a challenging area of
research but there have been some encouraging
early successes. In some cases, the crossing of different modified mouse lines has led to interesting
discoveries. For example, undulated mutant mice lack
the gene encoding the transcription factor Pax-1,
and Patch mutant mice are heterozygous for a null
allele of the platelet-derived growth factor gene.

541

Hybrid offspring from a mating between these two
strains were shown to model the human birth defect
spina bifida occulta (Helwig et al. 1995). In other
cases, such crosses have pointed the way to possible
novel therapies. For example, transgenic mice overexpressing human α-globin and a mutant form of
the human β-globin gene that promotes polymerization provide good models of sickle cell anemia
(Trudel et al. 1991). However, when these mice are
crossed to those ectopically expressing human fetal
hemoglobin in adulthood, the resulting transgenic
hybrids show a remarkable reduction in disease
symptoms (Blouin et al. 2000). Similarly, crossing
transgenic mice overexpressing the anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl-2 to rds mutants that show inherited
slow retinal degeneration resulted in hybrid offspring in which retinal degeneration was strikingly
reduced. This indicates that Bcl-2 could possibly be
used in gene therapy to treat the equivalent human
retinal degeneration syndrome (Nir et al. 2000).
The most complex diseases involve many genes,
and transgenic models would be difficult to create.
However, it is often the case that such diseases can
be reduced to a small number of “major genes” with
severe effects, and a larger number of minor genes.
Thus, it has been possible to create mouse models of
Down syndrome, which in humans is generally caused
by the presence of three copies of chromosome 21.
Trisomy for the equivalent mouse chromosome 16
is a poor model because the two chromosomes do
not contain all the same genes. However, a critical
region for Down syndrome has been identified by
studying Downs patients with partial duplications of
chromosome 21. The generation of YAC transgenic
mice carrying this essential region provides a useful
model of the disorder (Smith et al. 1997) and has
identified increased dosage of the Dyrk1a (minibrain)
gene as an important component of the learning
defects accompanying the disease. Animal models
of Down syndrome have been reviewed (Kola &
Hertzog 1998, Reeves et al. 2001).
Gene medicine is the use of nucleic acids to
prevent, treat, or cure disease
While disease modeling uses gene manipulation to
create diseases in model organisms, gene medicine
refers to the use of the same technology to ameliorate
or even permanently cure diseases in humans. Gene
medicine has a wide scope and includes the use of
DNA vaccines, the targeted killing of disease cells
(e.g. cancer cells), the use of oligonucleotides as

542

CHAPTER 26

X

Mutant (disease) gene – loss of function

D

Mutant (disease) gene – dominant gain of function

1 Gene augmentation therapy
Functional
gene

X
X

2 Gene inhibition therapy
Antisense
gene etc.

D
D

3 Gene targeting
Homologous
functional gene

X or
D

4 Assisted killing
Antigen,
cytokine etc.

D

Death
D

Immune system
stimulated
5 Prodrug therapy
TK etc

Ganciclovir

D

Death
D

Confers
sensitivity

drugs, and the use of gene transfer to correct genetic
defects (gene therapy). Gene transfer can be carried
out in cultured cells, which are then reintroduced
into the patient, or DNA can be transferred to the
patient in vivo, directly or by using viral vectors. The
ex vivo approach can be applied only to certain
tissues, such as bone marrow, in which the cells are
amenable to culture. Gene therapy can be used to
treat diseases caused by mutations in the patient’s
own DNA (inherited disorders, cancers), as well as
infectious diseases, and is particularly valuable in
cases where no conventional treatment exists, or
that treatment is inherently risky. Strategies include
(Fig. 26.12):

•

•
•

•

Fig. 26.12 Overview
of gene-therapy
strategies.

gene augmentation therapy (GAT), where DNA
is added to the genome with the aim of replacing a
missing gene product;
gene targeting to correct mutant alleles;
gene inhibition therapy using techniques such as
antisense RNA expression or the expression of
intracellular antibodies to treat dominantly acting diseases;
the targeted ablation of specific cells.

Therapeutic gene transfer effectively generates
transgenic human cell clones, and for this reason
only somatic cells can be used as targets. The prospect of germ-line transgenesis in humans raises

543

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

serious ethical concerns, and with the rapid advances
in technology allowing germ-line transformation
and nuclear transfer in numerous mammals, these
concerns will need to be addressed in the very near
future (Johnson 1998). As an alternative to permanent gene transfer, transient gene therapy can
be achieved using oligonucleotides, which can disrupt gene expression at many levels but do not
permanently change the genetic material of the cell
(Pollock & Gaken 1995).
The tools and techniques for gene therapy are
essentially similar to those used for gene transfer to
any animal cells. Transfection, direct delivery, or
transduction (see Chapter 12) can be used to introduce DNA into cells. Viral vectors are most popular
because of their efficiency of gene transfer in vivo.
However, extreme precautions need to be taken to
ensure the safety of such vectors, avoiding potential
problems such as the production of infectious viruses
by recombination, and pathological effects of viral
replication. A number of viral vectors have been
developed for gene therapy, including those based on
oncoretroviruses, lentiviruses, adenovirus, adenoassociated virus, herpes virus, and a number of hybrid
vectors combining advantageous elements of different parental viruses (Robbins et al. 1998, Reynolds
et al. 1999). The risks associated with viral vectors have
promoted research into other delivery methods, the
most popular of which include direct injection of DNA
into tissues (e.g. muscle), the injection of liposome–
DNA complexes into the blood, and direct transfer by
particle bombardment or other methods. Although
inherently much safer than viruses, such procedures
show a generally low efficiency (Scheule & Cheng
1996, Tseng & Huang 1998, Kay et al. 2001).

DNA vaccines are expression constructs
whose products stimulate the immune
system
The immune system generates antibodies in response to the recognition of proteins and other
large molecules carried by pathogens. With typical
vaccines, the functional component of the vaccine
introduced into the host is the protein that elicits
the immune response. The introduction of DNA
into animals does not generate an immune response against the DNA molecule, but, if that DNA
is expressed to yield a protein, that protein can stimulate the immune system (Reyes-Sandoval & Ertl
2001). This is the basis of DNA vaccination, as first
demonstrated by Ulmer et al. (1993) (Fig. 26.13).
DNA vaccines generally comprise a bacterial plasmid carrying a gene encoding the appropriate antigen under the control of a strong promoter that is
recognized by the host cell. The advantages of this
method include its simplicity, its wide applicability,
and the ease with which large quantities of the
vaccine can be produced. The DNA may be administered by injection, using liposomes or by particle
bombardment. In the original demonstration, Ulmer
and colleagues introduced DNA corresponding to
the influenza virus nucleoprotein and achieved
protection against influenza infection. Since then,
many DNA vaccines have been used to target viruses
(e.g. measles (Cardoso et al. 1996); HIV (Wang
et al. 1993, Fuller et al. 1997, Hinkula et al. 1997);
Ebola virus (Xu et al. 1998)), other pathogens
(e.g. tuberculosis (Huygen et al. 1996)), and even the
human cellular prion protein in mice (Krasemann
et al. 1996).

Killed or
attentuated
pathogen

Fig. 26.13
A comparison of conventional
vaccination and DNA
vaccination.

Protein subunit
Conventional vaccination
Body is presented with antigen

DNA vaccination
Body is presented with DNA
Antigen expressed inside body

544

CHAPTER 26

The DNA-vaccination approach has several additional advantages. These include the following:
•

•

•

Certain bacterial DNA sequences have the innate
ability to stimulate the immune system (see
Klinman et al. 1997, Roman et al. 1997).
Other genes encoding proteins influencing the
function of the immune response can be cointroduced along with the vaccine (e.g. Kim et al.
1997).
DNA vaccination can be used to treat diseases
that are already established as a chronic infection
(e.g. Mancini et al. 1996).

In principle, DNA vaccination has much in common with gene therapy (discussed below), since both
involve DNA transfer to humans, using a similar
selection of methods. However, while the aim of gene
therapy is to alleviate disease, by either replacing a
lost gene or blocking the expression of a dominantly
acting gene, the aim of DNA vaccination is to prevent disease, by causing the expression of an antigen
that stimulates the immune system.
Gene augmentation therapy for recessive
diseases involves transferring a functional
copy of the gene into the genome
The first human genetic engineering experiment
was one of gene marking rather than gene therapy,
and was designed to demonstrate that an exogenous
gene could be safely transferred into a patient and
that this gene could subsequently be detected in cells
removed from the patient. Both objectives were met.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (cells that naturally

1 Remove bone
marrow from
patient

seek out cancer cells and then kill them by secreting
proteins such as tumor necrosis factor, TNF) were
isolated from patients with advanced cancer. The
cells were then genetically marked with a neomycinresistance gene and injected back into the same
patient (Rosenberg et al. 1990).
The first clinical trial using a therapeutic genetransfer procedure involved a four-year-old female
patient, Ashanthi DeSilva, suffering from severe
combined immune deficiency, resulting from the
absence of the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA).
This disease fitted many of the ideal criteria for
gene-therapy experimentation. The disease was life
threatening (therefore making the possibility of
unknown treatment-related side-effects ethically
acceptable) but the corresponding gene had been
cloned and the biochemical basis of the disease was
understood. Importantly, since ADA functions in the
salvage pathway of nucleotide biosynthesis (p. 225),
cells in which the genetic lesion had been corrected
had a selective growth advantage over mutant cells,
allowing them to be identified and isolated in vitro.
Conventional treatment for ADA deficiency involves
bone marrow transplantation from a matching
donor. Essentially the same established procedure
could be used for gene therapy, but the bone marrow
cells would be derived from the patient herself, and
would be genetically modified ex vivo (Fig. 26.14).
Cells from the patient were subjected to leukopheresis and mononuclear cells were isolated. These were
grown in culture under conditions that stimulated
T-lymphocyte activation and growth and then transduced with a retroviral vector carrying a normal
ADA gene as well as the neomycin-resistance gene.
Following infusion of these modified cells, both this

2 Culture
mononuclear cells
ex vivo

3 Transfect
(or transduce) with
functional ADA gene

5 Return modified
cells to patient

4 Select stable
transformants

Fig. 26.14 Procedure for ex vivo gene
therapy, based on the treatment for ADA
deficiency.

Applications of recombinant DNA technology

patient and a second, who began treatment in early
1991, showed an improvement in their clinical condition as well as in a battery of in vitro and in vivo
immune function studies (Anderson 1992). However, the production of recombinant ADA in these
patients is transient, so each must undergo regular
infusions of recombinant T-lymphocytes. Research
is ongoing into procedures for the transformation
of bone marrow stem cells, which would provide a
permanent supply of corrected cells.
Gene-augmentation therapies for a small number
of recessive single-gene diseases are now undergoing
clinical trials. We consider cystic fibrosis (CF) as an
example (Davies et al. 2001). CF is a disorder which
predominantly affects the lungs, liver, and pancreas.
The disease is caused by the loss of a cAMP-regulated
membrane-spanning chlorine channel. This results
in an electrolyte imbalance and the accumulation of
mucus, often leading to respiratory failure. CF is a
recessive disorder, suggesting that the loss of function could be corrected by introducing a functional
copy of the gene. Indeed, epithelial cells isolated from
CF patients can be restored to normal by transfecting
them with the cloned cystic fibrosis transmembrane
regulator (CFTR) cDNA. Unlike ADA-deficiency, the
cells principally affected by CF cannot be cultured
and returned to the patient, so in vivo delivery strategies must be applied. Targeted delivery of the CFTR
cDNA to affected cells has been achieved using
adenoviral vectors, which have a natural tropism
of the epithelial lining of the respiratory system.
Recombinant viruses carrying the CFTR cDNA have
been introduced into patients using an inhaler
(Zabner et al. 1993, Hay et al. 1995, Knowles et al.
1995). The CFTR cDNA has also been introduced
using liposomes (e.g. Caplen et al. 1995). While
such treatments have resulted in CFTR transgene
expression in the nasal epithelium, there were neither consistent changes in chloride transport nor
reduction in the severity of CF symptoms; they have
been largely ineffective.
Gene-therapy strategies for cancer may
involve dominant suppression of the
overactive gene or targeted killing of the
cancer cells
Cancer gene therapy was initially an extension of
the early gene-marking experiments. The tumorinfiltrating leukocytes were transformed with a gene
for TNF in addition to the neomycin-resistance gene,
with the aim of improving the efficiency with which

545

these cells kill tumors by increasing the amount of
TNF they secreted. Although TNF is highly toxic to
humans at levels as low as 10 µg/kg body weight,
there have been no side-effects from the gene therapy
and no apparent organ toxicity from secreted TNF
(Hwu et al. 1993). One alternative strategy is to
transform the tumor cells themselves, making them
more susceptible to the immune system through the
expression of cytokines or a foreign antigen. Another
is to transform fibroblasts, which are easier to grow
in culture, and then co-inject these together with
tumor cells to provoke an immune response against
the tumor. A number of such “assisted killing”
strategies have been approved for clinical trials (see
review by Ockert et al. 1999).
Direct intervention to correct cancer-causing genes
is also possible. Dominantly acting genes (oncogenes)
have been targeted using antisense technology,
either with antisense transgenes, oligonucleotides
(see Nellen & Lichtenstein 1993, Carter & Lemoine
1993), or ribozymes (Welch et al. 1998, Muotri et al.
1999). An early report of cancer gene therapy
with antisense oligonucleotides was that of Szczylik
et al. (1991) for the treatment of chronic myeloid
leukemia. They used two 18-mers specific for the
BCR–ABL gene junction generated by the chromosomal translocation that causes this particular cancer,
and showed that colony formation was suppressed
in cells removed from cancer patients. Cancers
caused by loss of tumor-suppressor gene function
have been addressed by replacement strategies in
which a functional copy of the appropriate gene is
delivered to affected cells (e.g. see Cai et al. 1993,
Harper et al. 1993, Smith et al. 1993, Hahn et al.
1996). A further strategy, known as prodrug activation therapy, involves the activation of a particular
enzyme specifically in cancer cells, which converts a
nontoxic “prodrug” into a toxic product, so killing
the cancer cells. This can be achieved by driving the
expression of a so-called “suicide gene” selectively
in cancer cells. An example is the HSV thymidine
kinase gene, in combination with the prodrug ganciclovir. Thymidine kinase converts ganciclovir into a
nucleotide analog which is incorporated into DNA
and blocks replication by inhibiting the DNA polymerase. Activation of the enzyme specifically in cancer cells can be achieved by preferential delivery to
dividing cells through the use of oncoretroviruses
(e.g. Moolten 1986, Culver et al. 1992, Klatzmann
et al. 1996). Another way is to use transcriptional
regulatory elements that are active only in cancer
cells (e.g. Harris et al. 1994, Su et al. 1996).

